country : Republic of Korea

General information
Shinan Dadohae,comprises an island archipelago in the southwest of the Republic of Korea. It includes terrestrial and marine areas as well as large tidal flats, which are home to a great diversity of species and serve as resting places for rare migratory birds. Traditional forms of fishing (e.g. hand-fishing) and salt production are still practiced in this area.

Ecological Characteristics
Temperate Evergreen Broadleaf Forest Zone: The dominant species in this zone are Castanopsis cuspidata, silver magnolia, and camellia trees. There are also herbaceous plants such as Ardisia japonica, Hedera rhombea, Saeri trees, and Kalopanax pictus.Dune Vegetation: Dune vegetation includes Ischaemum anthephoroides, Zoysia macrostachya, Vitex rotundifolia, Calystegia soldanella, Messerschmidia sibirica, and acolony of Carex kobomugi on Jeungdo Island. Several unusual species, including Phragmites communis and Vitex rotundi folia are distributed throughout the dunes.Evergreen Coniferous Forest Zones on Uninhabited Islands: A colony of Japanese black pine trees dominates the seashores and hill sides. On some uninhabited islands, there are remnant patches of temperate evergreen coniferous trees and Japanese black pine trees.There are also insects, such as Graphium sarpedon and Papilio protenor, in temperate evergreen coniferous trees and costal dunes.Tidal Flat: Reed and Phragmitis communities are dominant in wetland areas. In the coastal area, various saltmarsh plants are developing such as halophyte communities. Many biological organisms are in the inter-tidal zone. The surface of the tidal flat is an important habitat for diatoms and plankton, due to the complexity of ecological circulation and the food chain, many shells and invertebrate are found here.With Jangdo Island High Moor and Jeungdo Tidal Flat, the biosphere reserves has 2 sites that are part of the RAMSAR Wetland Convention.

Socio-Economics Characteristics
Core Areas : Monitoring andstudy are being conducted in order to develop areas for mountain climbing and recreation. The maritime region of the core area can be used for eco-tourism and cruises. Also, trails for the residents can be used without damaging the ecosystem.Buffer Zones: Businesses based on indigeous knowledge are conducted within the tidal flats and Dadonhae National Park, particulary ‘Sun Dried Salt,’ a local specialty is produced in eco-friendly manner. Also, ecotourism programs, such as sightseeing tours and cycling can be beneficial in various ways and are therefore worth considering.Transition Area: Eco-friendly fishery and fish breeding is conducted in this area. However, maritime transport systems need to be reorganized to become more environmentally sustainable. Developing ecotourism in this area with the involvment of the local community and reflecting the natural features is also recommended. In addition, there is a need to maintain the specialization of the local products representing the region’s natural characteristic. The area in general is likely to be developed as a residential area.