country : Egypt

Brief synthesis
Abu Mena is located south of Alexandria, between Wadi el-Natrun and Alexandria itself. It represents the development of an early Christian pilgrimage Centre from the 5th to the 7th centuries AD. Growing up around the tomb of the martyred Saint Mena, which was thought to cause miracles, the ancient pilgrimage Centre developed into an unparalleled, sprawling complex of early Christian monastic architecture. The site is an outstanding example of a major, early Christian monasticism and pilgrimage Centre with a distinctive artistic character, blending Egyptian architectural traditions with those of Europe and Asia Minor that advanced Christian practices. The site was important in attracting Christian pilgrims in antiquity and represents a mixture of religious, funerary and living architecture. In addition to the built remains
in situ
, papyrus and ostraca found at the site are exhibited in several museums around the world and attest to the international significance of the property.
The archaeological site contains the remains of a large ecclesiastical complex with a baptistery and two churches at its Centre, which, along with the Tomb church with the cave of the Saint and the cruciform shaped pilgrim’s church, form one large architectural complex. Two other churches are situated in the northern and eastern neighbourhoods. The so-called Eastern Church represents the spiritual Centre of the monastic settlement in the area. Besides these churches, several public buildings serve as pilgrims’ rest houses. Two public baths, several workshops and cisterns as well as olive, oil, raisin, wine presses and pottery kilns, are to be found at the property as well as the remains of the civil settlement around the ecclesiastical buildings. The main buildings were constructed with ashlar masonry of limestone set in lime mortar, the columns were usually made of marble and evidence exists of mosaic decoration. Simpler buildings were erected using mud bricks covered with a fine lime plaster. The role of the site as a pilgrimage Centre is still strong and an energetic monastic community still inhabits the area, and relics thought to confer blessing are still stored within its confines. The site has retained its significance for the Coptic community for over fifteen centuries.
Criterion
(iv):
Abu Mena is an outstanding example of one of the first early Christian monastic Centre developed in the Near East. It was also a major pilgrim Centre with a much larger settlement than many of its contemporary sites in the Near East. Its architectural elements, in a wide range of building types, were strongly influenced by Egyptian practice, and express clearly the articulation of traditional Egyptian architecture with various other styles from the Mediterranean basin and were a significant advancement of early Christian architecture and practices.
Integrity
All the elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value including the remains of Abu Mena archaeological structures with its composite plan are present within the property and the property therefore meets the conditions of integrity. The integrity of the property is stable as rising water related to irrigation systems of the surrounding agricultural lands are being contained through a dewatering project and its monitoring and maintenance system. The fabric of the churches, the tomb of Saint Mena, the pilgrims’ rest houses, public baths, workshops and cisterns is stable, and the periodic maintenance of these archaeological elements is ongoing, although the property is still under pressure from the risks of heavy rains, winds, humidity, and fires.
Authenticity
The attributes that underpin the authenticity of the property are the overall design of the monastery and its buildings and the survival of the original building materials, first recorded by Kaufmann in excavations of 1905. These include limestone, bricks, mortars, marble, the unique overall design, the planning of the Christian Centre, and its completely preserved holy marble settlement. Although complete historical structures are few, the lower portions, ground plans, and some vertical elements still remain. These attributes are truthfully expressed by their form and design, and by their materials and substance. The original urban layout has been retained in its entirety along with surviving buildings, which include a great basilica, the Martyr’s tomb, churches, hostels, and public buildings and olive, raisin, wine presses reflect the development of industry and technology in this early historical area (the 4th century).
Protection and management requirements
The framework of regulations and the Antiquities protection law in Egypt ensure appropriate, qualified, and effective legal protection. Abu Mena World Heritage Site has been registered within the category of Islamic and Coptic antiquities since 1956, thus applying the Antiquities Protection Law No. 117 of 1983, amended by Law No. 3 of 2010, Law 91 of 2018 and Law No. 20 of 2020. The Antiquities Law No.117 of 1983 and its amendments ensure the protection of the property. Since its inscription on the World Heritage List in 1979, the property has become a national heritage park, which dictates strict measures for protection.
Within the national legal and administrative framework, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (MoTA) represented by the Supreme Council of Antiquities (SCA) is responsible for the protection, conservation and management of the Abu Mena World Heritage Site and its buffer zone, and regulation of all antiquities and archaeological excavations in Egypt. Abu Mena comes within the control and management of the Islamic and Coptic and Jewish Antiquities Sector of the SCA. The neighbouring Saint Mina Monastery is consulted informally on management aspects of the archaeological site.
The Supreme Council of Antiquities issues permits for all types of conservation-restoration works on the registered sites, including all types of monuments. The main body (Islamic, Coptic and Jewish Antiquities Sector), ensuring the protection of the visual integrity of the property within the designated protection zones of the property, is responsible for implementing the Egyptian Antiquities Protection Law no. 117 of 1983 amended by law No. 61 of 2010, No. 91 of 2018 and No 20 of 2020 to protect the monuments of the property, organize the administrative structure, formalize its departments and describe its functions, organize all activities related to the archaeological sites restoration, rehabilitation, and reuse projects, and discuss critical issues with all stakeholders. There are also Egyptian laws and regulations to protect the property, such as Law No. 689 of 1956 to determine the public interest, Agricultural Law No. 53 of 1966, Law No. 143 of 1981 for Desert land, Irrigation and drainage law No. 12 of 1984, and Law No. 149 of 2019 for civil associations.
There is a five-year management plan covering the inscribed area of the property and buffer zone. The MoTA team develops a long-term plan based on the monitoring of the implementation of the plan. Work substantially starts on the long-term plan within one year from the implementation of the plan. The final Management Plan ensures the systematic and comprehensive conservation and management of the property.
The management plan of the Abu Mena World Heritage property offers a collective vision and provides decision-making tools for preservation and conservation of all components of the property in response to many assessments conducted in its preparation, detailed policies, and objectives for general site protection, conservation, and management. The plan provides an anchor to involve all stakeholders related to the property and its buffer zone. In the course of its preparation, there were large numbers of workshops and meetings. These were determined after stakeholders’ assessments had been established. The Management Plan documents the property’s components and identifies rehabilitation projects for each of the architectural components as well as plans for archaeological excavations and conservation; the Plan also includes designs for the visitor facilities and improvement of access to the property, and proposals for regulation of the visitor flow. Detailed strategies and actions are also formulated in order to implement the management plan and the monitoring results of the first stage will be considered to set the long-term master plan.
Moreover, the entire property and surrounding lands have been under the protective purview of the very careful Abu Mena monastic community for centuries which assures a great measure of security around the archaeological vestiges. To address factors that threaten the property, efforts continue to manage and monitor the effects of rising groundwater. A project to lower the underground water is being implemented to halt any further rising of the water table, and an efficient system for monitoring the water table has been established. Conservation and restoration of the archaeological elements of the property is ongoing. Plans for conservation and continued maintenance actions are implemented by the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities in collaboration with the Ministry of irrigation and water resources, Saint Mina Monastery and Alexandria Governorate according to a timeframe of the Corrective measures program.