country : Bulgaria

Brief synthesis
There are several layers of wall paintings in the interior from the 11th, 13th, 15-17th and 19th centuries which testify to the high level of wall painting during the different periods. The paintings with the most outstanding artistic value are those from 13th century. Whilst they interpret the Byzantine canon, the images have a special spiritual expressiveness and vitality and are painted in harmonious proportions.
Criterion (ii):
From an architectural point of view, Boyana Church is a pure example of a church with a Greek cross ground-plan with dome, richly decorated facades and decoration of ceramic elements. It is one of the most remarkable medieval monuments with especially fine wall paintings.
Criterion (iii):
The Boyana Church is composed of three parts, each built at a different period - 10 century, 13th century and 19th century which constitute a homogenous whole.
Integrity
The integrity of Boyana church is fully assured. In 1917 a park was created around the church, thereby securing its immediate surroundings through being separated from the impact of modern traffic. The property has also remained intact from historic invasions, and other destructive threats. Three separate zones are defined in the property boundaries and buffer zone, through which appropriate control measures are applied.
Authenticity
The concept, form and development of the three constructional phases of the property, from the 10th-11th; 13th; and 19th centuries, are clearly evident. Necessary conservation and restoration works have been completed. Where sufficient evidence existed, later façade renders have been removed to reveal the original appearance of walls.
To safeguard and present the internal 11th and 12th centuries fresco fragments, those from the 13th century, and the later 1882 additions in the antechamber, they were cleaned, refilled and conserved. This work was completed in 2008. The property is now air-conditioned, and under constant surveillance.
Protection and management requirements
The management is implemented by virtue of:
Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No 19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties.
Instructions on the Protection and Preservation of the World Monument "Boyana Church" and its Protective Zone were adopted by Official Cover Letter No.RD-91-00-17, signed by the Chairman of the Culture Committee, and dated 10.08.1989. These Instructions are mandatory and set out the responsibilities of the interested parties, including the state, local institutions and owners.