country : India

Brief synthesis
Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park, located in the Panchmahal District of Gujarat State in north-western India, features a concentration of archaeological, historical, and living cultural heritage properties cradled in an impressive landscape. Focused on Pavagadh Hill, a volcanic formation that rises 800 m above the surrounding plains, the property includes the remains of settlements dating from the prehistoric to medieval periods, the latter represented by a hill-fortress of an early (14th-century) Hindu capital and the remains of an Islamic state capital founded in the 15th century. The large property, comprised of 12 separate areas, contains the remains of fortifications, palaces, religious buildings, residential precincts, and water-retaining installations, as well as the living village of Champaner.
This area was conquered in the 13th century by the Khichi Chauhan Rajputs, who built their first settlement on top of Pavagadh Hill and fortification walls along the plateau below the hill. The earliest built remains from this period include temples, and amongst the important vestiges are water-retention systems. The Turkish rulers of Gujarat conquered the hill-fortress in 1484. With Sultan Mehmud Begda’s decision to make this his capital, the most important historic phase of this site began. The settlement of Champaner at the foot of the hill was rebuilt and remained the capital of Gujarat until 1536, when it was abandoned.
Except for the structural remains of the main buildings and forts, most parts of the capital city remain buried and unexcavated, though the planning and integration of the essential features of a city – royal estates, utilities, religious edifices, and spaces – can be seen and interpreted. Champaner-Pavagadh’s 14th-century temples and water-retaining installations, together with the later capital city’s religious, military, and agricultural structures, represent both Hindu and Muslim architecture. Champaner’s importance as a capital and residence of a sultan are best illustrated in the Great Mosque (Jama Masjid), which became a model for later mosque architecture in India. At Champaner, the land, the people, and the built heritage are each components of a complex, and dynamic process. The Brahmanical temple of Kalika Mata (the guardian goddess of the hill) atop Pavagadh Hill is an important living shrine, attracting a large number of pilgrims from Gujarat and other parts of the country throughout the year.
Criterion (iii):
The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park with its ancient architecture, temples and special water-retaining installations together with its religious, military and agricultural structures, dating back to the regional Capital City built by Mehmud Begda in the 16th century, represents cultures which have disappeared.
Criterion (iv):
The structures represent a perfect blend of Hindu-Moslem architecture, mainly in the Great Mosque (Jama Masjid), which became a model for later mosque architecture in India. This special style comes from the significant period of regional sultanates.
Criterion (v):
The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park is an outstanding example of a very short living capital, making the best use of its setting, topography and natural features. It is quite vulnerable due to abandonment, forest takeover and modern life.
Criterion (vi):
The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park is a place of worship and continuous pilgrimage for Hindu believers.
Integrity
Within the boundaries of Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park are located all the known elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, including the ensemble of prehistoric and early- and late-medieval period royal, sophisticated, and ordinary settlements and building complexes. The archaeological deposits are largely unexcavated. The 1328.89-ha property is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey its significance. The property deals with small numbers of visitors at its centrally protected monuments, but with a large number of visitors at its Brahmanical religious shrine, the Kalika Mata temple, atop the hill. The landscape and buildings are well kept and complete despite considerable structural conservation work required. The preserved architecture blends flawlessly with the surrounding cityscape, underlying and overlooking the picturesque rim of nearby hillocks. There are no perceptible threats to the cultural relics, nor does the property suffer from adverse effects owing to development and/or neglect. There are buffer zones that total 2911.74 ha.
Authenticity
The property is fully authentic in terms of its location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. Structural and chemical conservation of the protected monuments and sites has been undertaken, while other monuments and archaeological remains have been left largely as they were found in order to keep the possibility open for others to understand the original attributes and value of a given heritage ensemble, and especially for future generations to develop other interpretations along current scientific lines. In a limited number of cases where the stability of a monument was under threat, minimal restoration has been undertaken, clearly demarcating and documenting the scale of restoration. No change in design, workmanship or setting was made. The attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property – which is the only remaining complete and unchanged Islamic pre-Mughal city – are thus truthfully and credibly expressed, and fully convey the value of the property.
Protection and management requirements
Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park, whose multiple owners include the Archaeological Survey of India, the Gujarat State Forest Department, State Department of Archaeology, and State Revenue Department, Jai Kalika Temple Trust, Jain Temple Trusts, Fakir Sect Trust, and the private sector, is protected under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act (1958) and Rules (1959), amendments (1992), and Amendment and Validation Act (2010), Gujarat Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (1965), and Champaner-Pavagadh World Heritage Area Management Authority Act (2006), as well as various Forest Acts and the Gujarat Panchayats Act (1961). Thirty-nine monuments and sites are individually protected.
A hierarchical framework of archaeologists and conservators at the federal as well as State levels is available to inform the conservation, preservation, and management of the property. The Archaeological Survey of India works with the Champaner-Pavagadh World Heritage Area Management Authority to manage the property. The latter has been formulated under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to the Government of Gujarat, and to which all stakeholders are members, including the Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India. An Integrated Management Plan, as recommended by the World Heritage Committee to underpin conservation decisions and interventions, has been developed and adopted. Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require continuing to monitor the state of conservation of the property and to assess the implementation of the legal and institutional tools and the Management Plan.