country : Russian Federation

Brief synthesis
Located in Kenozero National Park in the north-western area of the European region of the Russian Federation, the picturesque Kenozero relict cultural landscape depicts the peasant lifestyle that evolved here from the 12th century, following the gradual Slavic colonisation of the region. It incorporates a large number of traditional rural settlements with vernacular wooden architecture set in an evocative landscape of lakes, rivers, forests, and fields that preserve traces of past traditional practices. Wooden churches, churchyards and chapels, many of which were originally decorated with painted ceilings, or “heavens”, are the key social, cultural, and visual landmarks of the area. The spatial organisation of these buildings, together with sacred groves, cemeteries, and wooden crosses dotting the landscape, bear witness to the spiritual connection of the inhabitants to this environment.
Criterion (iii):
The exceptional collection of historic wooden buildings of Kenozero Lake, in all their rich diversity of types and uses, is an important representation of the cultural traditions of this region. Traditional woodworking and log construction bear witness to the evolution of early log structures into a sophisticated assembly of domestic and religious buildings. Historic rural settlement patterns and evidence of the use of natural resources in a scenic lake-river landscape are likewise a testimony to a cultural tradition in the Russian North.
Integrity
The boundaries of the property contain all the key attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value. A substantial number of traditional wooden buildings have been preserved in their authentic locations and settings within the property. Of the seventy-seven settlements that existed in the early 20th century, sixty-two have been fully preserved, containing 1,520 traditional religious and domestic wooden structures.
Authenticity
The property is authentic in terms of the preserved wooden architectural elements, the patterns of the settlements, and the setting. The monuments of wooden architecture have been preserved with respect for the authenticity of their materials, form, and design. The form and layout of fields and lakeshores around inhabited villages are also maintained. Despite modernisation and several restructurings of agriculture and production in the 20th century, the spirit and feeling of the cultural landscape remain complemented by surviving intangible heritage and traditional practices supported by the management of the property.
Protection and management requirements
The property is protected by several legal mechanisms at the national and regional levels. There is comprehensive legal protection from both cultural and natural sectoral perspectives. Kenozero National Park was established in 1991, and a 500-metre-wide protection zone was delineated in 1995 as an additional protection of the National Park. The protection zone is intended to ensure the preservation of the natural areas, the economic use of which directly affects the biological stability of ecosystems and the Kenozero cultural landscape, and to prevent potential adverse impacts by anthropogenic processes.
Kenozero National Park is the main management authority. The administration of the National Park includes local community members as well as professionals from the region. There are several national, regional, and local strategies in place to support sustainable development. Kenozero National Park oversees all issues regarding the property in coordination with the relevant sectoral institutions as well as local authorities of the respective municipalities.
The management plan of the property and its buffer zone covers the period 2021-2027 and is in the process of implementation. It introduces a unified approach to the management of the National Park, UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, and the property. The plan includes strategies for all these three different domains, integrating conservation and sustainable development within a holistic approach. The protection of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property is the basis for the entire strategic planning process. The management plans for all cultural landscape complexes should be developed. The local communities are recognised as having a special role amongst the stakeholders.