country : Senegal

Brief synthesis
In the Senegal River delta, the Djoudj National Park is a 16,000 ha wetland ecosystem that includes more than 1.5 million migratory birds. Comprised of lakes surrounded by streams, the property is a vital but fragile sanctuary for species such as the white pelican, African spoonbill, cormorant, pink flamingo and great egret.
Criterion (vii):
By its location, Djoudj National Park is more than a haven for Palaearctic migratory birds. It is an oasis in the desert consisting of a chain of lakes, backwaters, fords and sandbanks.  It is the first migration stopover after crossing the Sahara for species of Palaearctic and Afrotropical birds. It should be noted that due to technical improvements to upgrade the conditions of migration reception (building nest boxes), species began to breed. With the annual renovation of these improvements and efforts to control the hydraulic system, the number of migratory as well as nesting species is increasing.
Criterion (x):
The property is a wetland of around 16,000 ha comprising a large lake surrounded by streams, ponds and backwaters. This habitat hosts more than 1.5 million birds of 365 species including over 120 species of Palaearctic migrants. The property is a vital sanctuary for nesting species such as the white pelican (
Pelecanus onocrotalus
), the purple heron (
Ardea purpurea),
the African spoonbill (
Platalea alba
), the great egret (
Casmerodius albus
), the night heron (
Nycticorax
nycticorax) and the cormorant (
Phalacrocorax carbo
). The property also contains large populations of crocodiles and manatees.
Integrity
The park boundaries are correctly defined, but the property faces significant threats:  agricultural chemicals are a source of water pollution for the Senegal River, threatening the delicate balance of the food chain; and the construction of a downstream dam project could severely disrupt the hydrological equilibrium of the property. Following the start-up of the Diama dam, located downstream from the park, the water balance of the property was severely disrupted. This resulted in the proliferation of invasive aquatic plants (
Pistia stratoites, Lavinia molesta, Typha australis,
etc.), the reduced amplitude of water levels, and decrease and / or disappearance of some bird colonies. For these reasons, the property was inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger during the periods 1984-1988 and 2000-2006.
Protection and management requirements
The protection of the property is governed by various national laws, and a development and management plan has been developed. No manner of exploitation is permitted except for scientific purposes. The property is managed by a management administration under the direct supervision of the State through the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development and the National Parks Directorate. This administration works closely with an inter-village committee assisted by a team of eco guards involving local communities in solving management problems.  With great effort, the State Party reduced the proliferation of invasive species representing such a threat that they must be completely eradicated. This effort is one of the management priorities of the property, even if the main concern is the restoration of the ecological characteristics of the property in the long term,rdea  to ensure the return of the bird population to its previous levels.