country : Russian Federation

Brief synthesis
The Ensemble of Ferrapontov Monastery is situated in the Vologda region, in the north-western part of the Russian Federation on a small hill, between Borodaevskoe and Paskoe lakes, 120 km northwest of the city of Vologda.
The Moscow monk Ferrapont founded the monastery in 1398. The Ensemble of the Monastery was formed in the 15th-17th centuries. The core of the Ensemble is the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Virgin (1490), which is especially remarkable among the six surviving buildings of the Monastery. The others are the Church of the Annunciation, with a refectory chamber, the Treasury Chamber, the St. Martinian Church, the Churches of Epiphany and St. Pherapont above the Holy Gate, and the Bell Tower. In the 19th century the monastery territory was enclosed with a stone fence.
The history of
Ferrapontov Monastery
was linked with
important events at some crucial points during the conformation of the centralized Russian
state
, such as
the approval
authority
of the first "
Emperor
of All Russia
"
Ivan III,
the reign
of the first Russian
tsar
Ivan IV and the exile
of Patriarch Nikon.
In the 15th-16th centuries, Ferrapontov Monastery became a major cultural and ideological centre of the region, and was one of the main monasteries that considerably influenced the policy of Muscovy.
The architecture of the monastery, a remarkable example of the Rostov architectural style, is outstanding in its inventiveness and purity.
The buildings
of the monastery retained all
the characteristic features
and interior
decoration
. The
Ensemble of
the Ferrapontov Monastery
is also a vivid
example of
the harmonious
unity with
the natural
surrounding landscape that has changed
little
from the 17th
century,
emphasizing the
unique spiritual
system of
northern monks
, while
at the same time
revealing
features of
economic structure
of northern
peasantry.
The murals
of the Cathedral
of the Nativity of the Virgin
have a special significance
for Russian
culture
and other cultures worldwide
. The m
urals of
the Cathedral
are the only
paintings of
the greatest
Russian master Dionisy
the Wise,
which
have been entirely preserved to
this day
in their original form
.
The Ensemble
of the Ferrapontov Monastery,
with the most valuable and completely preserved frescos
of Dionisy,
is a unique
example of
the
integrity and
unity of the Russian
style
of the northern
monastery ensemble
of the
15th-17th centuries
.
Criterion (i):
The wall paintings of Dionisy in the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Virgin at Ferrapontov Monastery are the highest expression of Russian mural art in the 15th-16th centuries.
Criterion (iv):
The complex of Ferrapontov Monastery is the purest and most complete example of an Orthodox monastic community from the 15th-17th centuries, a crucial period in the cultural and spiritual development of Russia.
Integrity
The inscribed property encompasses 2.10 ha, with a buffer zone of 20 ha and contains all the attributes that convey its Outstanding Universal Value. The integrity of
the
Ensemble of Ferrapontov Monastery
and
the good conservation of all
its
attributes
are
ensured
by the
boundaries of the property, which have remained unchanged and are
clearly delineated by a the stone wall that surrounds
all the architectural monuments and constructions of the Monastery. None of the attributes are threatened by contemporary development, deterioration or neglect
.
The landscape around the monastery has remained almost unchanged for centuries, and has preserved its harmonious unity. Thanks to its location and compactness, the expressive silhouette of the monastery can easily be viewed from different directions, and all natural and anthropogenic impacts on the property have been avoided.
Authenticity
The Ensemble, erected in the 15th-17th centuries, has preserved a high level of authenticity in terms of its original layout, form, materials and techniques, its design, as well as its old architectural appearance, notably with regard to the interiors. Given its good preservation, the Monastery has not required large-scale reconstruction. Certain original architectural forms and structures were reconstructed on the basis of scientific studies and using traditional materials: large size brick stones for walls, wood for joints, fillings and for roof constructions. There are no modern buildings or constructions on the territory of the monastery.
Conservation works on the wall paintings have been especially commendable, being restricted to consolidation and cleaning. The authenticity of the frescos by Dionisy is determined on the basis of the absence of any interference in structure. Unique methods of conservation of the layers of the cathedral’s paintings ensured that there would be only
negligible
interferences with the artist’s paintings and no violation of their structure or aesthetic perception.
Today, the monastery houses the state museum. However, changes in the authenticity of function are part of the history of the property, and the addition of the museum plays an indispensable role in the protection of the authenticity of the ensemble. The Russian Orthodox Church uses the Churches of St. Pherapont and St. Epiphany as parish churches, and services are also foreseen at the Church of St. Martinian.
Protection
and management
requirements
According to the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of 02.04.1997, No. 275, the
Ensemble of
the Ferrapontov Monastery
is declared as a monument
of history and culture of federal significance.
The Museum of the Frescoes of Dionisy in the Ferrapontov Monastery is a branch of the Kirillo-Belozersky historical architectural and art museum reserve. Since 1998, the Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation is responsible for financing and running the museum. At present, the Museum is under control of the Department of Cultural Heritage of the Ministry and the Department of Control, Supervision and Licensing in the Sphere of Cultural Heritage. In 2011, the Conciliatory Commission, consisting of representatives of Vologda Eparchy of the Russian Orthodox Church and the Museum, was created to address the management and conservation of the cultural heritage monuments of the Monastery.
The state of conservation of the property is also under monitoring by the National Commission of the Russian Federation for UNESCO.
Conservation challenges to be addressed include the continued
preservation of the unique
frescoes
by Dionisy
, the preservation of
the ensemble
of the monastery, as well as the
sustainable monitoring of the state of conservation of
the property
and the monitoring and enforcement of buffer zone regulations.