country : Republic of Korea

Brief
synthesis
The Getbol, Korean Tidal Flats property comprises four component parts, Seocheon Getbol (6,809 ha), Gochang Getbol (5,531 ha), Shinan Getbol (110,086 ha), and Boseong-Suncheon Getbol (5,985 ha), all located on the eastern shoreline of the Yellow Sea on the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula. These components total an area of more than 128,000 ha with buffer zones totalling nearly 74,600 ha. The Yellow Sea, lying between
the
Korean Peninsula and China, hosts one of the world’s largest and most productive tidal flat ecosystems supporting millions of migratory waterbirds at the heart of the East Asian-Australasian Flyway (EAAF). The four component parts support globally important populations of threatened migratory waterbirds in the EAAF, and overlap with Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA), Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas (IBA), Biosphere Reserves, Ramsar Sites and East Asian Australasian Flyway Partnership Network Sites.
The livelihoods of many human communities along the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula depend on the harvest of marine resources, often based on traditional knowledge. Anthropogenic activity has transformed some of the coastal wetlands. However, the Tidal Flat Act adopted in 2019 halts any further reclamation of tidal flats and action plans under this legal framework have been progressively restoring affected tidal flats.
Criterion (x):
The property contains crucial habitats for in-situ conservation of the biodiversity of the Yellow Sea region, including threatened and endemic species. It supports 47 species endemic to the Yellow Sea and several endangered marine
invertebrate
species. Reflecting its habitat diversity (including islands, rocky shores, beaches, sand flats, mud flats and salt marshes), some 2,150 plant and animal species have been recorded. The property encompasses many of the critical stopover sites for several globally threatened species of migratory birds, along the EAAF, one of the world’s most important yet jeopardized flyways. Many of the estimated 50 million waterbirds of the EAAF depend on the Yellow Sea’s coastal wetlands to stage on their annual migration between nesting areas in eastern Asia to as far north as Siberia and Alaska, and non-breeding areas to as far south as Australasia.
The remarkable concentrations of migratory waterbirds using the four component parts include important numbers of globally threatened species and species limited to the EAAF. These include the Spoon-billed Sandpiper; Far Eastern
Curlew
; Black-faced Spoonbill; Great Knot; Spotted Greenshank; Hooded Crane; Saunders’s Gull; and Chinese Egret.
The property also supports an exceptionally high invertebrate biodiversity with a total of 2,169 known species including 375 species of benthic diatoms, 152 species of marine algae, and 857 species of macrobenthos. As regards marine
invertebrates
, the property supports five threatened and 47 restricted-range species, including the tiger crab, which is reported to be a monospecific genus worldwide and endemic to the Yellow Sea.
Integrity
The property includes the least affected tidal flats and associated wetlands in the southwestern part of the Korean Peninsula, and they therefore provide critical habitats for migratory waterbirds on the East Asian-Australasian Flyway, including internationally threatened species, playing a crucial role for the conservation of biodiversity. The property encompasses muddy, sandy, mixed, and rocky habitats as well as beach, sand spit, and characteristic sediment bodies, which are widely developed around numerous islands. The stable supply of
terrigenous
sediments from the Geumgang River greatly contributes to maintaining these diverse habitats. Consequently, these globally important habitats support one of the highest species diversity of waterbirds including threatened species in the EAAF as well as rich biodiversity of other species living in and on the wetlands.
While the boundaries of the four component parts provide protection for migratory birds by including feeding, breeding, and roosting areas, there is scope for additional component parts to be added and for boundaries of existing component parts to be improved as part of a second phase nomination to cover more fully the scope of critical areas used by waterbirds. As the component parts are situated in landscapes shaped by intensive use, potential threats from developments in the surrounding areas need to be monitored carefully and mitigated as needed. In addition, threats such as pollution from inland areas and internationally from marine sources as well as declining fishing stocks deserve close attention.
Protection
and management requirements
The Republic of Korea has the full ownership of the property including the marine buffer zones. The four component parts of the serial property are protected by law in their entirety as Wetland Protected Areas (WPAs) under the Wetlands Conservation Act (WCA). Various other laws and regulations, including the Conservation and
Management
of Marine Ecosystems Act, apply in the property and buffer zones, effectively restricting damaging activities.
The Tidal Flat Act of 2019 (and associated 2019-2023 action plan for tidal flat ecosystem restoration) represents a progressive shift in national coastal management policy from coastal reclamation to tidal flat protection and restoration. This provides a mechanism, supervised by the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries that further supports ecologically based coastal management within and outside the property with long-term measures to restore mudflats on the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula degraded by past developments. Continuous attention is needed to ensure that there is no further development that would have negative impact on the attributes of conservation significance in each component part of the property.
In light of the
importance
of inland wetlands and other inland habitats for many bird species, systematic coordination between tidal flat management and management of inland habitat is also required.
Traditional fishing
activities
are facilitated at current levels and are subject to self-governed rules by the fishing cooperatives in accordance with the Fisheries Act and Wetland Conservation Act. The inherent interests of, and traditional management by the local communities play an important role in ensuring the effective protection of the property given that healthy tidal flats underpin many local livelihoods.
Tourism is concentrated in only a few places of the property and its buffer zone (notably around Suncheon City), whereas many of the more remote areas, such as the small islands, have little or no tourism.
The property has adequate financial and technical resources, including staffing in all authorities involved, enhanced following
inscription
. Many activities by different levels of government, non-governmental organizations and local communities support the effective management and enforcement of the Wetland Protected Areas that underpin the property. There are also many measures in place to prevent, reduce and respond to risks (e.g. those related to natural and anthropogenic disasters).
The integrated management system and plan needs to demonstrate how it incorporates details on specific management interventions essential to coherently support and maintain the Outstanding Universal Value across the serial property
as
a whole, noting the State Party intends to enhance management effectiveness as part of a Phase II nomination to extend the serial property.