country : Canada

Brief synthesis
Gros Morne National Park, located on the Great Northern Peninsula in the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, illustrates some of the world’s best examples of the process of plate tectonics. Within a relatively small area are classic, textbook examples of monumental earth-building and modifying forces that are unique in terms of their clarity, expression and ease of access. The property presents the complete portrayal of the geological events that took place when the ancient continental margin of North America was modified by plate movement by emplacement of a large, relocated portion of oceanic crust and ocean floor sediments. The park also presents an outstanding demonstration of glaciations in an island setting. The fjords, waterfalls and geological structures of the park combine to produce a landscape of high scenic value.
Criterion (vii):
Gros Morne National Park, an outstanding wilderness environment of spectacular landlocked, freshwater fjords and glacier-scoured headlands in an ocean setting, is an area of exceptional natural beauty.
Criterion (viii):
The rocks of Gros Morne National Park collectively present an internationally significant illustration of the process of continental drift along the eastern coast of North America and contribute greatly to the body of knowledge and understanding of plate tectonics and the geological evolution of ancient mountain belts. In glacier-scoured highlands and spectacular fjords, glaciation has made visible the park’s many geological features.
Integrity
Gros Morne National Park’s clearly defined boundary encompasses an area measuring 180,500 hectares. This area is of sufficient size to completely portray the progression of geological events that took place when an ancient ocean and the ancient continental margin of eastern North America were destroyed and uplifted to form a mountain chain through the action of plate tectonics. Collectively the sequences of rocks that illustrate this geological evolution are represented by: an ancient continental crust composed of intensely metamorphosed granite and gneisses; a continental shelf with tropical carbonate sediments, containing abundant fossils; a continental slope of thick sequences of shales inter-bedded with limestone conglomerates, also with abundant fossils; a complete cross section of oceanic lithosphere including large exposures of mantle material; and significant sequences of volcanic rocks of oceanic origin.
These geologic features and the glacially-derived topography are in near-pristine condition in Gros Morne National Park. This condition is likely to persist since there is effective legislation to protect the property from development and since the property is managed in a way that can accommodate the current or projected number of visitors without adverse effects. Additionally, the collection of rocks and fossils is controlled and limited to research purposes. The natural process of erosion is ongoing and continues to shape and expose the geologic sequences upon which the World Heritage designation is based.
The integrity of the geological features on which the World Heritage inscription rests is not adversely affected by any of the stressors identified in the national park’s management plan. However, a moose population introduced over 100 years ago in Newfoundland has expanded and degraded native forests creating visual and ecological impacts in the park. Steps are being taken to mitigate this problem.
Protection and management requirements
The
Canada National Parks Act
provides effective legal protection for the property
.
As part of the formal management planning processes required under this legislation, the property’s heritage resources are monitored in a structured way for early identification of threats and stressors. As a principle of practice, strategies to address vulnerabilities are developed in cooperation with area residents as well as with other stakeholders and user groups as appropriate. The park’s management plan is updated every 10 years.
There are two right-of-way corridors that exist in Gros Morne National Park: a highway transportation corridor and a hydro-electric transmission corridor. Any decisions Parks Canada makes with respect to these corridors are made within the context of protecting the park’s ecological integrity and its Outstanding Universal Value.
Developmental pressures external to the park boundary include offshore oil and gas exploration and potential developments on provincially-owned Crown lands. National park management monitors the progress of these as well as any other potential external developments and provides input into all formal regulatory consultation processes regarding them with a view to protecting the site’s Outstanding Universal Value, in addition to its ecological integrity.