country : Canada

Brief synthesis
Founded in the 17th century, Québec City bears eloquent testimony to important stages in the European settlement of the Americas: it was the capital of New France and, after 1760, of the new British colony. The Historic District of Old Québec is an urban area of about 135 hectares. It is made up to two parts: the Upper Town, sitting atop Cap Diamant and defended by fortified ramparts, a citadel, and other defensive works, and the Lower Town, which grew up around Place Royale and the harbour. A well-preserved integrated urban ensemble, the historic district is a remarkable example of a fortified colonial town, and unique north of Mexico.
Criterion (iv)
:
A coherent and well-preserved urban ensemble, the Historic District of Old Québec is an exceptional example of a fortified colonial town and by far the most complete north of Mexico.
Criterion (vi)
:
Québec, the former capital of New France, illustrates one of the major stages in the European settlement of the colonization of the Americas by Europeans.
Integrity
The boundaries of the property encompass all necessary elements to express the outstanding universal value of the Historic District of Old Québec. The historic centre, confined within the current boundaries of the district, is the product of more than four centuries of history. During this period, the fortified town retained the integrity of its essential historical components, particularly from the standpoint of its architecture and urban spatial organization. The property is of adequate size (135 ha) to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes which convey the property’s significance. It has not suffered unduly from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. Over the years, many integration, restoration, rehabilitation, redevelopment and protection and stabilization projects have been carried out. Overall, the projects undertaken in the Historic District of Old Québec have not compromised its integrity.
Authenticity
The Historic District of Old Québec is authentic in terms of its form and design, materials and substance, and location and setting. Since the time of its inscription, the property has changed considerably, particularly with respect to the organization of its historic urban landscape. However, the attributes of the property express its outstanding universal value in a truthful and credible manner.
Protection and management requirements
The Historic District of Old Québec enjoys strong legal protection and the support of all levels of government concerned. An intergovernmental committee, called the Comité de concertation du patrimoine de Québec, was created to coordinate the activities of the different levels of government.
The area of the Historic District of Old Québec, designated by the provincial authority as the
site patrimonial
du
Vieux
-
Québec
(Old Québec heritage site), is legally protected under the Province of Quebec’s
Cultural Property Act
, which was adopted in 1963. Its boundaries were established by provincial decree in 1964.
Since its inclusion on the World Heritage List in 1985, a number of buildings in Old Québec have been added to the list of properties protected under the
Cultural Property Act
, including the Site historique et archéologique de l’Habitation-Samuel-De Champlain, the Ursuline Convent of Québec and the archaeological reference collection of Place Royale.
The City of Québec assumes all management responsibilities under its jurisdiction relating to land use and urban planning (zoning bylaws). Moreover, the
Règlement sur la politique de consultation publique
(bylaw on the public consultation policy) adopted in 2007 stipulates that the Conseil de quartier Vieux-Québec–Cap-Blanc–Colline-Parlementaire (district council) must be consulted before any amendments are made to urban planning and traffic bylaws. Furthermore, any construction, renovation, restoration and signage interventions in Old Québec must have the prior authorization of the Commission d’urbanisme et de conservation of the City of Québec.
The Quebec government and the City of Québec routinely enter into cultural development agreements making it possible to offer grant programs and major financial contributions to support the restoration of the heritage buildings in Old Québec.
The federal government, through various departments and Parks Canada, manages a large number of heritage properties. All federal departments, except Crown corporations, are required to comply with the Treasury Board Policy on the Management of Real Property. The Federal Heritage Buildings Review Office (FHBRO) of Parks Canada is mandated to assist them in this task. The Department of National Defence, which is responsible for the Citadel, and Public Works and Government Services Canada play a role in ensuring heritage preservation in the Historic District of Old Québec. As the owner and manager of national historic sites of Canada, Parks Canada invests in the preservation and presentation of its properties, and consequently in the historic district. With nearly 70 persons, places and events of national historic significance under its responsibility, the Agency helps to raise public awareness concerning the significance of the Historic District of Old Québec.
Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring proposed changes and additions to the property that could, for example, impact its visual integrity and appropriate measures will continue to be implemented to ensure the protection, integrity and authenticity of the property.