country : Spain

Brief synthesis
Cuenca is a municipality located in central Spain, 170 km south-east of Madrid. The historic walled town stretches over 23 hectares, with an important monumental heritage and a consolidated cultural tradition. Built by the Islamic rulers in a defensive position at the outer fringes of the Caliphate of Córdoba, Cuenca is an unusually well-preserved medieval fortified city. The site is dominated by the upper town, developed on the site of Islamic fortress after its conquest by the Castilians in the 12th century. It then became a royal town and bishopric endowed with important buildings.
This is the archetype of the fortress-town, and the part that gives Cuenca its individual character. The “Castillo” quarter is a small suburb just outside the walls, with some remains of the Islamic fortress. Within the upper town there is a wealth of historic religious buildings from the medieval, renaissance, and Baroque periods, notably the 12th century cathedral, built on the site of the former Great Mosque and the first Gothic cathedral in Spain. Taking full advantage of its location, the city towers rise above the magnificent countryside.
No account of the upper town is complete without references to the so-called “Hanging Houses” (casas colgadas). These private houses near the Episcopal Palace were built in the later medieval period on the spectacular steep bluffs overlooking the bend of the Huecar river. Most of them were rebuilt in the 16th century in their present narrow, high form, with two or three rooms on each of three or more floors.
The historic quarter of Cuenca is an outstanding example of the medieval fortress-town. Other examples exist in Spain (Toledo) and in Italy (Urbino, Orvieto) and France (Carcassonne). The special qualities of Cuenca relate to the intact nature of its townscape, as a result of a long period of economic stagnation and social deprivation, and to its dramatic contribution to the natural landscape.
The Old Town of Cuenca has preserved its original townscape remarkably intact along with many excellent examples of religious and secular architecture from the 12th to 18th centuries. It is also exceptional because the walled town blends into and enhances the fine rural and natural landscape in which it is situated.
Criterion (ii):
The Old Town of Cuenca is an outstanding example of the medieval fortress town that has preserved its original townscape remarkably intact along with many excellent examples of religious and secular architecture from the 12th to 18th centuries.
Criterion (v):
Cuenca is also exceptional because the walled town blends into and enhances the fine rural and natural landscape within which it is situated.
Integrity
The boundaries of the property include the walled town and its suburbs. The walled town of Cuenca shows an integrity of its cultural heritage. The conservation level, restoration works, and the rehabilitation policies have made possible an adequate level of integrity in the historic town. The impact of deterioration processes is controlled. One of the most important threats is the tourism pressure, including affluence of visitors, commercial activities in public spaces and traffic. Other issues are run down edifices, excessive building renovations, and decreasing population numbers due to the lack of facilities and insufficient mobility.
Some restoration works have been carried out very respectfully and have maintained the integrity of the monuments. All reconstructions in historic buildings are made on the basis of complete and detailed documentation. This has been done thanks to the work of the different administrations (Town Hall of Cuenca and the Department of Culture of the Autonomous Community).
Authenticity
The importance of the upper town lies not so much in its individual buildings, though many of these are of outstanding architectural and artistic quality, as in the townscape that they create when looked at as a group, on the fortified site dominating the river valleys. This feature gives Cuenca its special character and quality. In the light of the fact that the significance of Cuenca lies in its overall townscape as an historic ensemble, it may fairly be asserted that the authenticity is very high. The protection arrangements and the conservation strategies are considered sufficiently effective to respect the authenticity of the historic walled town of Cuenca.
Protection and management requirements
The historic zone of Cuenca, which was declared a “Picturesque Site” in 1963, is designated as a Historic Ensemble under the provisions of Law No 16/1985 on the Spanish Historic Heritage. The Royal Board of the City of Cuenca was created to operate as a permanent collegiate body promoting and coordinating all action, so the current management system is sufficiently effective. The legal framework, which encompasses Cuenca´s heritage management, consists of a wide array of regulations issued by different administrative levels. The Spanish administration provides a state law which defines the main protection figures, addresses the planification of historic cities and other issues regarding international conventions linked with heritage protection. The regulations promulgated by the Government of Castilla La Mancha deal with specific protection levels as well as territorial and urban planning activity. The historic town of Cuenca is included in the Register of Cultural Interest Sites with the category of Historic Site. Furthermore, there is a General Urban Zoning Scheme, and a Special Scheme for the Planning and Improvement Plan and Protection of Cuenca’s Old Quarter and its Hoces (Special Plan). Changes need to be made in respect of urban planning regimes, and the specific planning and management bodies taking part in the relevant processes through the Royal Board Consortium.
Although great strides have been made, the use of traditional construction materials and construction sizes will be further improved due to the continued valorisation of the urban landscape. In line with the recommendations of the Special Plan, it is also necessary to regulate run-down buildings, excessive building renovations, and the decrease of population due to lack of facilities and insufficient mobility. The old walled town of Cuenca needs measures to improve urban regulation, rehabilitation programmes, public transportation alternatives, and pedestrian accessibility. Control has increased through the maintenance of pre-existing vernacular structures and improving their residential and commercial use.