country : China

Brief synthesis
The Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties were built between 1368 and 1915 AD in Beijing Municipality, Hebei Province, Hubei Province, Jiangsu Province and Liaoning Province of China. They comprise of the Xianling Tombs of the Ming Dynasty and the Eastern and Western Qing Tombs inscribed on the World Heritage List in 2000; the Xiaoling Tomb of the Ming Dynasty and the Ming Tombs in Beijing added to the inscription in 2003, and the Three Imperial Tombs of Shenyang, Liaoning Province (Yongling Tomb, Fuling Tomb, and Zhaoling Tomb, all of the Qing Dynasty) added in 2004.
The Ming and Qing imperial tombs are located in topographical settings carefully chosen according to principles of geomancy (
Fengshui
) and comprise numerous buildings of traditional architectural design and decoration. The tombs and buildings are laid out according to Chinese hierarchical rules and incorporate sacred ways lined with stone monuments and sculptures designed to accommodate ongoing royal ceremonies as well as the passage of the spirits of the dead. They illustrate the great importance attached by the Ming and Qing rulers over five centuries to the building of imposing mausolea, reflecting not only the general belief in an afterlife but also an affirmation of authority.
The tomb of the first Ming Emperor, the Xiaoling Tomb broke with the past and established the basic design for those that followed in Beijing, and also the Xianling Tomb of the Ming Dynasty in Zhongxiang, the Western Qing Tombs and the Eastern Qing Tombs. The Three Imperial Tombs of the Qing Dynasty in Liaoning Province (Yongling Tomb, Fuling Tomb, and Zhaoling Tomb) were all built in the 17th century for the founding emperors of the Qing Dynasty and their ancestors, integrating the tradition inherited from previous dynasties with new features from the Manchu civilization.
The Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties are masterpieces of human creative genius by reason of their organic integration into nature, and a unique testimony to the cultural and architectural traditions of the last two feudal dynasties (Ming and Qing) in the history of China between the 14th and 20th centuries. They are fine works combining the architectural arts of the Han and Manchu civilizations. Their siting, planning and design reflect both the philosophical idea of “harmony between man and nature” according to
Fengshui
principles and the rules of social hierarchy, and illustrate the conception of the world and power prevalent in the later period of the ancient society of China.
Criterion(i)
: The harmonious integration of remarkable architectural groups in a natural environment chosen to meet the criteria of geomancy (Fengshui) makes the Ming and Qing Imperial Tombs masterpieces of human creative genius.
Criterion(ii)
: The tombs represent a phase of development, where the previous traditions are integrated into the forms of the Ming and Qing Dynasties, also becoming the basis for the subsequent development.
Criterion(iii)
: The imperial mausolea are outstanding testimony to a cultural and architectural tradition that for over five hundred years dominated this part of the world.
Criterion(iv)
: The architectures of the Imperial Tombs integrated into the natural environment perfectly, making up a unique ensemble of cultural landscapes. They are the exceptional examples of the ancient imperial tombs of China.
Criterion(vi)
: The Ming and Qing Tombs are dazzling illustrations of the beliefs, world view, and geomantic theories of
Fengshui
prevalent in feudal China. They have served as burial edifices for illustrious personages and as the theatre for major events that have marked the history of China.
Integrity
All attributes carrying the outstanding universal values of the property, including physical evidence, spiritual elements and historical and cultural information, have been kept intact. The boundaries of all property areas are complete; the main buildings and underground chambers are kept in a good condition; the overall layouts remain undisturbed; the buildings and historic sites within the protected areas have not suffered excessive intervention or alteration, and the integrity of the overall layouts of the mausolea in the Ming and Qing dynasties have been authentically presented. The topography and natural settings of the mausolea, which were chosen according to
Fengshui
principles, are still maintained today.
Authenticity
The historic condition of the buildings has been preserved to the time they were constructed or renovated in the Ming and Qing dynasties. A few lost buildings were restored in strict conformity with firm historic records and archaeological materials. The inscribed property together with its settings authentically and explicitly conveys the spirit and conception, ancient funeral system, and artistic achievements embedded in the traditional culture.
Protection and
m
anagement requirements
Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties have been protected legally by central and local governments. On the basis of enforcing the
Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics
, multi-layered heritage protection authorities and administrations have enacted relevant protection regulations, and delimited protected areas and construction control zones (the buffer zones). No project within or outside the inscribed property that may impact on heritage values can be implemented without the approval of the State cultural heritage administration authority. Environmental capacity and construction activities are effectively controlled to contain adverse impacts from development. Heritage protection is rationally and effectively balanced against tourism development and urban construction.
Based on the current protection and management system, relevant administrative organizations of the Ming and Qing Imperial Tombs will revise and improve the conservation and management plans for the tombs. According to the revised conservation and management plans, the conservation work will be carried out more scientifically; construction activities within the buffer zones will be controlled more strictly, and the cultural heritage sites and their historic landscape and setting will be protected and conserved in an integrated way. The responsible authorities will strengthen daily care and maintenance of the ancient architecture in strict accordance with the principle of minimal intervention, including well-planned restoration. Furthermore, measures will be taken to improve capacity building of related organizations, to set up a coordination mechanism between protection and management organizations of heritage sites and regional administration. By doing so, protection and management on heritage sites will be enhanced with improved means to interpret and promote heritage value.