country : Thailand

Brief synthesis
The Kaeng Krachan Forest
Complex
(KKFC) lies in the Tenasserim Range near the border area of Thailand and Myanmar. The Forest complex covers vast forest areas stretching across parts of three provinces in the western part of Thailand: namely Ratchaburi, Phetchaburi, and Prachuap Khiri Khan, and encompasses, almost entirely, three national parks and one wildlife sanctuary. Located in the Indo-Malayan ecoregion, the property has a total area of nearly 409,000 ha.
The area’s topography is rugged with high mountains in the west and rolling hills to the east and elevation ranges between 37 and 1,231 meters above sea level. The climate is influenced by the north-eastern and south-western monsoon winds.
At the macro-scale, KKFC boasts a rich and varied biological diversity resulting from the confluence of four zoogeographical sub-regions (Sundaic, Sino-Himalayan, Indochinese and Indo-Burmese) and four floristic provinces (Indo-Burmese or Himalayan, Indo-Malaysian, Annamatic, and Andamanese). The KKFC maintains significant populations of key globally significant species including the presence of endemic and endangered species. The property is also a priority site for the Indo-Burma biodiversity hotspot providing crucial areas for tiger and elephant conservation and protects a number of important bird habitats.
Criterion (x):
KKFC hosts a remarkable range of mammals, birds and reptiles from this region and is considered as one of the top 500 most irreplaceable protected areas in the world for the conservation of mammal, bird and amphibian species. The property is characterised by six forest types, dominated by semi-evergreen, dry evergreen and moist evergreen forests and complemented by mixed deciduous forest, montane forest, and deciduous dipterocarp forest. The property represents a
meeting point of
several zoogeographical realms and floristic provinces being the northernmost point for many species from the south and conversely the southernmost point for species from the north. In addition to this macro scale diversity, the diverse geological characteristics and highly variable topography contribute to an exceptionally high habitat diversity at the micro scale.
The property’s rich biodiversity is demonstrated by the presence of at least 459 known wild animal species, as well as by 81 rare species, and 48 endemic species.
The property is home to a large number of threatened and rare
plant species
, some of which are extinct elsewhere.
Prunus kaengkrachanensis
stands out as a rosaceous plant species discovered in 2015 and endemic to KKFC. Further critical species include Champi Doi (
Magnolia gustavii
), and Agarwood (
Aquilaria malaccensis
) and
Kamettia chandeei
of the dogbane family. The species
Geostachys smitinandii
of the ginger family is found only in the KKFC and the Dong Phayayen – Khao Yai Forest Complex Natural World Heritage site of Thailand. The property is also the world’s only home to the plant species
Trichosanthes phonsenae
from the cucumber family first discovered in 2003.
KKFC also maintains healthy populations of globally important and threatened wildlife species. A complete suite of top carnivores has been identified in the area, including eight species of
Felidae
(cat species), including tiger (
Panthera tigris
). The property stands out as one of the last few places where the Siamese crocodile (
Crocodylus siamensis
) is still present in the wild. It is home to the Sunda Pangolin (
Manis javanica
), Elongated Tortoise (
Indotestudo elongata
), Asian Giant Tortoise (
Manouria emys
) as well as Banteng (
Bos javanicus
), Asian Elephant (
Elephas maximus
), Dhole (
Cuon alpinus
), Asian Black Bear (
Ursus thibetanus
), Malay tapir (
Tapirus indicus
), Mainland Serow (
Capricornis sumatraensis
), Gaur (
Bos gaurus
) and Stump-tailed Macaque (
Macaca arctoides
).
Integrity
The nearly 409,000 ha property in Thailand is contiguous with a large forest area in neighbouring Myanmar, including the
Taninthaya Forest Complex and
the Tenasserim Ranges act as a natural border between the two countries. This connectivity context adds to the property’s integrity and offers scope for
transboundary and corridor conservation opportunities across a much larger intact forest landscape.
The KKFC also protects the head watersheds of many important rivers such as Phetchaburi, Kui Buri, Pranburi, Phachi, and Mae Klong Rivers. Some of these rivers provide water to the Ramsar Site of Sam Roi Yod National Park, which is one of Thailand’s best-known areas for water birds.
KKFC includes six forest types, which cover more than 96% of the property’s area. Dry evergreen forest covers a majority of the area, about 65%. The forest systems of the inscribed area remain intact and in good condition, providing suitable habitats for a remarkably diverse fauna and flora.
Protection
and
management
requirements
The four protected areas comprising the KKFC are strictly protected under relevant legislation. The protected areas include a wildlife sanctuary (Mae Nam Phachi) protected under the Wildlife Protection and Preservation Act B.E.2562 (2019), and three national parks (Chaloem Phrakiat Thai Prachan,
Kaeng
Krachan and Kui Buri) protected under the National Park Act B.E. 2562 (2019). The Kaeng Krachan and Kui Buri National Parks are connected by Kui Buri Forest Reserve and an Army Reserve Zone. This corridor is also regarded as a protected area under the Forest Reserve Act B.E. 2507 (1964) and the Military Reserve Zone Act B.E. 2478 (1935). The main
purpose
of the protected area designations is to safeguard and preserve the overall ecological integrity of the area, including the outstanding wildlife and species values and forested watersheds for Phetchaburi and Prachuap Khiri Khan provinces. The protected area administration consists of a Superintendent Unit with one or more deputies for each component as well as patrol stations located in and around the boundaries.
The National Park Act and Wildlife Conservation and Protection Act, both adopted in 2019, intend to strike a balance between natural conservation and sustainable utilization of resources. The Acts aim to legally permit local communities to reside in the property’s protected areas while also being able to make use of forest products for their sustainable livelihoods. Moreover, the legislations shall promote the participation of local communities in important decision-making processes related to the KKFC, including protected area management plan, land tenure survey, and legal mechanisms to enhance understanding between the local communities and Thai Government officials concerning land use. Effective and inclusive participation of local communities and indigenous peoples will be essential to build positive relationships that support sustainable livelihoods and participatory management approaches to safeguard Outstanding Universal Value.
Patrols cover about half of KKFC, concentrating on high biodiversity areas and areas of vulnerability to threats. Less accessible areas are patrolled from the air with targeted drop-in patrols as well as foot patrols.