country : Canada

Brief synthesis
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site contains the excavated
remains of a complete 11th-century Viking settlement, the earliest evidence of Europeans in North America.
Situated
at the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula of the island of Newfoundland, this exceptional archaeological site consists of eight timber-framed turf structures built in the same style as those found in Norse Greenland and Iceland from the same period. The buildings include three dwellings, one forge and four workshops, on a narrow terrace overlooking a peat bog and small brook near the shore of Epaves Bay in the Straight of Belle Isle
.
Artifacts found at the site show evidence of activities including iron production and woodworking, likely used for ship repair, as well as indications that those who used the camp voyaged further south.
The remnants correspond with the stories told in the Vinland Sagas, which document the voyages of Leif Erikson and other Norse explorers who ventured westward across the Atlantic Ocean from Iceland and Greenland to find and explore new territory, a significant achievement in the history of human migration and discovery.
Criterion (vi):
L’Anse aux Meadows is the first and only known site established by Vikings in North America and the earliest evidence of European settlement in the New World. As such, it is a unique milestone in the history of human migration and discovery.
Integrity
Measuring 7991 ha, L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is of sufficient size to ensure that the property is protected, remains intact, and takes in the full extent of the known Norse remains in the region. Its boundaries extend far beyond the areas that contain Norse archaeological remains, thus providing ample protection of the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s Outstanding Universal Value.
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is in stable condition. The archaeological site has been reburied in such a way as to protect the remnants from deterioration. There are no known or anticipated threats to the property, it is not at risk of degradation and does not suffer from adverse effects of development or neglect,
the totality being managed as a National Historic Site by Parks Canada Agency.
Authenticity
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is authentic in location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. Ample archival evidence shows the property to correspond with the journeys described in the Norse sagas.
Extensive archaeological research after the site’s discovery in 1960 revealed that the timber-framed structures were constructed with a particular type of gabled roof and covered with turf taken from the surrounding peat bog. The layout of the rooms, fireplaces and openings followed the characteristics of Norse design. Excavation uncovered evidence of iron production at the site, as well as approximately 800 wooden, bronze, bone, and stone artefacts that confirm the Norse origins of the property and provide important information on the work and lifestyle of the site’s occupants.
Protection and management requirements
L’Anse aux Meadows was established as a National Historic Site in 1975 under a Federal-Provincial agreement between Canada and the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador. The property is legally protected under the
Parks Canada Agency Act
(1998) and the
Canada National Parks Act
(2000), and the site has a management plan in place, which is reviewed and renewed at regular intervals. The management plan requires that the resources directly related to the reasons for designation as a national historic site are not impaired or under threat; that the reasons for designation are effectively communicated to the public; and that heritage values, including Outstanding Universal Value, are respected in all decisions and actions affecting the property.
The agreement that established L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site states that the Government of Canada and the Government of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador shall consult together to ensure that the future development of the communities and areas adjacent to the property is planned jointly and is in keeping with their proximity to this internationally significant property.
Parks Canada manages visitation and conservation at the site, and the artefact collection associated with the Viking base camp is stable and is displayed and/or stored under appropriate conditions.
Special attention shall be given over the long term to monitoring for issues that could impact the state of conservation in the future and taking appropriate actions to protect the site.