country : India

Brief synthesis
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty are a royal mound burial necropolis established by the Tai-Ahom in northeastern India. Set in the foothills of the Patkai Ranges in eastern Assam, the property contains features sacred to the Tai-Ahom and demonstrates their funerary traditions. Led by Prince Siu-kha-pha, the Tai-Ahom migrated to present-day Assam in the 13th century and selected Charaideo as their first capital and location for the royal necropolis. For 600 years (from the 13th to the 19th centuries CE), the Tai-Ahom created moidams (“home-for-spirit”) that work with the natural features of hills, forests, and water, creating a sacred geography by accentuating the natural topography. Sacred trees were planted and water bodies were created.
Ninety moidams are found within the Charaideo necropolis, sited on elevated land. The moidams have been created by building an earth mound (Ga-Moidam) over a hollow vault constructed of brick, stone or earth (Tak), and topped by a shrine (Chou Cha Li) at the centre of an octagonal wall (Garh). This shape symbolises the Tai universe. The shrine at the top is the Mungklang, a middle space symbolised as a golden ladder establishing a heaven-earth continuum. The vaults contain the buried or cremated remains of kings and other royal individuals together with grave goods such as food, horses, and elephants, and sometimes queens and servants. The moidams within the property testify to the changes in materials and design of the burial mounds over time. This is a physical space where Tai-Ahom royals became gods, symbolising a heaven-earth continuum. The Tai-Ahom rituals of Me-Dam Me-Phi (ancestor worship) and Tarpan (libation) are practiced at the Charaideo necropolis.
Criterion (iii):
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty bear witness to 600 years of Tai-Ahom royal funerary architecture and customs and are a testimony to Tai-Ahom cultural traditions from the 13th to 19th centuries CE. The archaeological remains of the moidams are evidence of the architecture, layout, and manifestations of the Tai-Ahom beliefs and traditions. The continuing ritual practices of Tai-Ahom at the property are also significant in relation to this criterion.
Criterion (iv):
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty are an outstanding example of a Tai-Ahom necropolis that represents in a tangible way the Tai-Ahom funerary traditions and associated cosmologies. For around 600 years, the Tai-Ahom sculpted this landscape according to their cosmological beliefs. The undulating topography was accentuated by excavating ditches and marking the troughs with moidams. The natural vegetation was enhanced by planting sacred trees, and water bodies were added by channelising streams to fill them. Together these features symbolise the Tai universe, and a heaven-earth continuum.
Integrity
The property contains the most important and well-preserved Tai-Ahom royal mound burials (moidams). These are protected by national and state legal frameworks. The state of conservation is generally good, and the factors affecting the property are heavy rainfall, soil erosion and vegetation growth. The boundaries are appropriate, and the buffer zone protects the setting and other features associated with the Tai-Ahom.
Authenticity
The Charaideo necropolis is a sacred landscape with built royal burial mounds that reflect Tai-Ahom beliefs. The moidams are largely intact, as is the rural landscape setting. The Buranjis (royal chronicles) provide details of the Tai-Ahom world view and daily life, including the funerary rituals and spiritual associations, as well as details of the materials and labour required to construct the moidams.
Protection and management requirements
The property is protected by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act of 2010, the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, and the Assam Ancient Monuments and Records Act, 1959. The National Monument Authority and Directorate of Archaeology, Government of Assam regulate development in the buffer zone, and the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India approves application for archaeological excavation. No development is allowed within the property.
The property is jointly managed by the Assam Government’s Directorate of Archaeology (DOA) and the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). The Group of Four Maidams is an Ancient Monument of National Importance, and the remainder of the property is the Charaideo Archaeological Site, an Ancient Monument of State Importance. Three committees have been established to ensure coordination: the State-level Apex Committee, a Local Level Committee that oversees maintenance issues, and a Ministerial Committee for overseeing works and projects.
The management system is guided by the National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Remains (2014). The Site Management Plan of Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty (2023-2030) applies to the whole property. The Infrastructure/Protection, Preservation of Charaideo Moidams Archaeological Site five-year project focuses on improvements to visitor infrastructure. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act of 2010, establishes processes and requirements for Heritage Impact Assessments. Further development of the management system to include a sustainable tourism strategy and interpretation plan is needed; as well as further development of the research plan and implementation of a landscape approach to the management of the property.
Local communities regard the moidams as sacred burial sites and actively protect them. In recognition of the importance of the involvement of local communities, additional strategies for community engagement have been outlined.