country : Greece

Brief synthesis
Although geographically distant from each other, these three monasteries of the middle Byzantine period (the first is in Attica, near Athens, the second in Phocida, near Delphi, and the third on the island of Chios, in the Northern Aegean), belong to the same typological series and share the same aesthetic and architectural characteristics. The churches are built on a cross-in-square plan with a large dome supported by squinches defining an octagonal space. In the 11th and 12th centuries they were decorated with superb marble works as well as mosaics on a gold background, all characteristic of the second golden age of Byzantine art.
Criterion (i):
The monasteries at Daphni, Hosios Loukas and Nea Moni of Chios represent, with their admirable mosaics on a gold background, unique artistic achievements. On this basis each one of these indisputable masterpieces of Byzantine art could have been included on the World Heritage List on its own merits.
Criterion (iv):
These three monasteries are outstanding examples of a type of construction characteristic of the middle period of Byzantine religious architecture. Nea Moni illustrates the most simple expression: an octagonal church with no added spaces. Hosios Loukas and Daphni are more complex. They have a central octagonal space surrounded by a series of bays that form a square. This more elaborate structure defines a hierarchy of volumes and functions and enables the implementation of an extensive iconographic and decorative plan. It is typical of other churches, like Christianou near Kyparissia, Panaghia Likodimou in Athens or Saint Sophia in Monemvasia. The two examples included in the property are, along with Saints Theodoroi of Mystras (included on the World Heritage List in 1989), the most representative by virtue of the perfection of their architecture, the beauty of their mosaics and paintings and their more satisfactory state of conservation.
Integrity
All three monuments include all the essential elements both concerning their architectural form, and their decoration. Each of them forms part of a monastic complex and a well-preserved natural environment (buffer zone).
Concerning the Daphni monastery, although the earthquake of 1999 caused damages to the monument, appropriate measures were taken immediately, so that today the property is in good condition.
The Katholikon (main church) of Nea Moni remains intact with
the exception of a few restoration
interventions
carried out in the late 19th century, after
the earthquake of 1881
.
It retains both
its initial
architectural
shell
as well as
its
interior and
exterior
decoration.
The monastery complex of Hosios Loukas and particularly its namesake Katholikon (main church), preserves its initial 11th-century form intact.
This
includes architectural and decorative elements
, namely the mosaics, frescoes, architectural
sculptures
,
marble revetment
and pavements. Few
were the losses
or later
repairs
during
the centuries
,
as in the case
of the dome
that
collapsed
and was rebuilt
probably in the
18th century.
The principal risks to the three monasteries are natural disasters such as forest fire (Nea Moni) and earthquake (Daphni and Nea Moni). Daphni has been subject to development pressures in the past.
Authenticity
All the three monuments conserve their authenticity expressed mainly by their form and design, the construction materials, their decoration, and the spirit and feeling of the place. More specifically, the Daphni monastery has preserved all its initial architectural and decorative elements. These are expressed in the construction of the Katholikon (main church), with courses of stone enclosed by bricks, the wealth of decorative brickwork surrounding the windows and the interior decoration consisting of wall mosaics and decorative marble, which have been enhanced after the restoration and conservation work. The Katholikon (main church) of Nea Moni has preserved its authentic mosaic decoration and the marble revetment of the lower parts, even its initial pavement. The church itself remains intact as to the construction materials and the initial architectural plan. The conservation and restoration work aims at restoring and consolidating the initial decorative and structural elements. Interventions or damages to the Katholikon (main church) of Hosios Loukas over the centuries were minimal. The most important of these occurred during the War of Independence (1821). The monument was restored by well-known Byzantinists during the 20th century. In particular, damages were restored in an exemplary manner, newer interventions were removed, and initial elements of the church (such as window panels of plaster) were revealed. Thus, the monument was rehabilitated, with few additions, in its initial form, while the authenticity of the whole was preserved.
Protection and management requirements
All three properties are protected by the provisions of the Archaeological Law 3028/2002 “On the Protection of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage in general”, and by separate ministerial decrees published in the Official Government Gazette. Protection and management are carried out by the Ministry of Culture, Education and Religious Affairs through the responsible regional services (Ephorates of Antiquities).
Daphni Monastery:
The Ephorate of Antiquities of West Attika, Pireus and Islands exercises strict construction control and is collaborating with the responsible services for the amelioration and specialization of protection measures of the property. After the earthquake of 1999, which caused extended damages to the monument, a wide program of restoration works was carried out, in the context of the 2nd and 3rd Community
Support
Framework. The works were carried out both in the Katholikon (main church), and in the wings of cells of the inner courtyard, as well as in the refectory, in the west chapel, in the cistern, and in the bathhouse. Special care was given to the restoration of the mosaics. As a result of these works, the site was partially reopened to the public, since 2008, with free entrance. Restoration works continues on the mosaics, on the upper part of the masonry and on the dome of the Katholikon (main church), whereas the first phase of the restoration of the fortification walls is complete. The works will be carried out in the frame of the National Strategic Reference Framework, and after their completion, the monument will be entirely restored.
The funding resources of the monument come from the national budget, the Community
Support
Framework and the National Strategic Reference Framework. An audio guide program will begin soon while there is a provision for the monument to be accessed by persons with special needs. The construction of modern lavatory facilities for visitors (including those with special needs) as well as the installation of an informative signpost for the visually impaired visitors have been completed.
The protection of the monument against natural disasters is ensured by the installation of a lightning rod, by the fire extinguishing system, by the system of instrumental surveillance (monitoring) by the continuous guard of the site in combination with an alarm system and a closed circuit surveillance system.
At the moment, educational programs are being elaborated and in the near future new guidebooks will be printed.
Nea Moni of Chios:
The protection
of the property is exercised by the Ephorate of Antiquities of Chios. As far as the management is concerned, the Ephorate of Antiquities of Chios is
in
collaboration
with the monastic community
and
the Holy
Metropolis of
Chios
,
Psara and
Oinousses
.
Financing for the conservation and protection of the monument derives from
national funds of the
Ministry of
Culture, Education and Religious Affairs
, European resources
and sponsoring
institutions and corporations. Works of preservation of the mosaics and restoration
of the Katholikon (main church)
have
already
been implemented. The primary
objective is to preserve the good condition of the Katholikon (main church) as well as to restore the surrounding
buildings of the monastery.
The necessary precautions against forest fires are being taken by the responsible authorities (fire brigade).
Main objectives
are also the following:
the promotion
of the monument
to the public,
the
offer of
educational
programs
for children
, the installation of info kiosks for the visitors and of facilities
infrastructure.
The cooperation with
the University of the Aegean (Department of Cultural
Technology
and Communication,
School of Social
Sciences) for the elaboration of the management plan was not successful. Therefore, there is no management plan at the moment.
Hosios Loukas:
The protection of the monument
is exercised by the Ephorate of
Antiquities of Boeotia
which supervises the entire valley in which lies the Monastery of Hosios Loukas.
As far as the management is concerned the Ephorate of Antiquities of Boeotia is
in
collaboration
with the monastic community.
The monastery
of Hosios
Loukas,
in
continuous use
for centuries, is
a
place of cult with a living monastic
community.
The revenues
of the monastery
come from
the exploitation of its agricultural properties
, the
organic agriculture
and the selling of
products
to the visitors
of the site. Revenues are also supported by
the exploitation of the landed property
,
the cafe
and
the point of sale
in the monastery.
The
Ministry of Culture, Education and Religious Affairs elaborates all
the
preservation
and rehabilitation
studies
.
After
approval by
the competent
collective
interdisciplinary
bodies
, studies are
carried out
under the direct
supervision of the Ephorate of Antiquities of Boeotia. Restoration and enhancement projects
within the property
are funded either
by the state
budget or
co-financed
by the Hellenic State
and the European
Union.
The protection of the monument is ensured by the continuous guard of the site. In the exhibition rooms of the property selected items are presented to the visitors. Furthermore, the property has all the necessary amenities (signposting, museum shop and canteen).
Finally, consolidation projects carried out on all three monuments have strengthened their resistance in case of an earthquake.