country : Germany

Brief synthesis
Located on the Danube River, the Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof is an exceptional example of a central-European medieval trading centre, which illustrates an interchange of cultural and architectural influences. The property encompasses the city centre on the south side of the river, two long islands in the Danube, the so-called Wöhrde (from the old German word: waird, meaning island or peninsula), and the area of the former charity hospital St Katharina in Stadtamhof, a district incorporated into the city of Regensburg only in 1924. A navigable canal, part of the European waterway of the Rhine-Main-Danube canal, forms the northern boundary of Stadtamhof.
A notable number of buildings of outstanding quality testify to its political, religious, and economic significance from the 9th century. The historic fabric reflects some two millennia of structural continuity and includes ancient Roman, Romanesque, and Gothic buildings. Regensburg's 11th to 13th century architecture still defines the character of the town marked by tall buildings, dark and narrow lanes, and strong fortifications. The buildings include medieval Patrician houses and towers, a large number of churches and monastic ensembles as well as the 12th century Stone Bridge.
The town is also remarkable as a meeting place of Imperial Assemblies and as the seat of the Perpetual Imperial Diet general assemblies until the 19th century. Numerous buildings testify to its history as one of the centres of the Holy Roman Empire, like the Patrician towers, large Romanesque and Gothic church buildings and monasteries – St Emmeram, Alte Kapelle, Niedermünster and St Jakob - as well as the cathedral St Peter and the late Gothic town hall.
Criterion (ii):
The architecture of Regensburg represents the city's role as a medieval trading centre and its influence in the region north of the Alps. Regensburg was an important transition point on continental trade routes to Italy, Bohemia, Russia and Byzantium. It also had multiple connections with the transcontinental Silk Roads. As such, the city exhibits an important interchange of cultural and architectural influences, which have shaped its urban landscape.
Criterion (iii):
The Old Town of Regensburg bears an exceptional testimony to cultural traditions especially in the Holy Roman Empire, being the location for most of the assemblies of the Empire in the High Middle Ages. Regensburg also significantly contributed to more recent European history being the seat of the Perpetual Assembly from 1663 to 1806. As a testimony to these functions, there are the remains of two imperial Palatine palaces from the 9th century, and a large number of other well preserved historic buildings, which are testimony to the wealth and political importance of the community.
Criterion (iv):
The Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof is an outstanding example of a central-European medieval trading town, which has well preserved its historical stages of development, and which is an exceptional illustration to the development of commerce particularly from the 11th to 14th centuries.
Integrity
Regensburg's Old Town has been able to reserve its original medieval outline since the 14th century. The Old Town survived the Second World War in exceptionally good shape. As a result, but also due to restoration efforts starting in the 1970s, a large number of old buildings have been preserved well, which contributes to the historical integrity of the town and the effective protection of important views of the property. The property therefore contains all elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value. There are no adverse impacts of development and/or neglect.
Authenticity
Taking into account that the city was built in stone, rather than timber, the individual listed buildings have maintained their authenticity. The restoration of the buildings is carefully monitored and correctly carried out, according to the legal provisions in place as well as respecting the historic fabric.
Management and protection requirements
The Old Town of Regensburg and its buffer zone have been legally protected since 1975 in accordance with the Bavarian Law for the Preservation of Historic Buildings. The inscribed property is also ruled by the 1982Statutes concerning Local Building Ordinances for the Protection of the Old Town of Regensburg ("Old Town of Regensburg Statutes"). The Federal Building Code (1986/1997) constitutes the legal basis for construction and development planning. Complemented by local by-laws and the management plan, this complex system of protection ensures the good state of conservation of the property.
Several institutions on communal and state level share the responsibility for protecting the property. The City of Regensburg is responsible for its management. The Steering Committee carries out integrative monitoring as a basis of a thorough planning process and sustainable development in the historic town, with due care being taken to ensure that its values are respected. Strategies aim at restoring the historic urban fabric as well as strengthening the vitality of the inhabited historic town.