country : Greece

Brief synthesis
Founded in 315 BC, the provincial capital and sea port of Thessalonika was one of the first bases for the spread of Christianity. Among its Christian monuments are fine churches, some built on the Greek cross plan and others on the three-aisled basilica plan. Constructed over a long period, from the 4th to the 15th century, they constitute a diachronic typological series, which had considerable influence in the Byzantine world. The mosaics of Thessalonika’s monuments (such as the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius and Hosios David [Latomou Monastery]) are among the great masterpieces of Early Christian art.
The monuments of Thessalonika inscribed on the World Heritage List are public edifices of various functions, religious, secular, military, including the 4 km long city walls. Because of their outstanding design and major artistic value these monuments are included among the most significant of the Byzantine period. Throughout the Byzantine era, the city constituted a cultural centre that determined the developments not only in immediately surrounding but also in neighbouring areas. It played an active or even competitive role in artistic trends originating in Constantinople.
The monuments
of Thessalonika
reveal a
continuous
artistic
exchange with
the
greatest cultural
centres of
each era
(Rome
, Constantinople).
The city itself
was an important
artistic centre
, from
its foundation and
throughout
the Byzantine
period.
Wall painting ensembles, mosaics and frescoes, preserved in Thessalonika’s monuments, represent some of the major artistic trends, that have been developed in Byzantine monumental painting from its beginnings (the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius, Hosios David), through the first period after iconoclasm (Saint Sophia) and the Comnenian period (Hosios David frescoes) to its culmination known as the Palaeologan Renaissance (late Byzantine period). To this last period belong significant monuments such as the Holy Apostles, the chapel of Saint Euthymios in the Church of Saint Demetrius, Saint Nikolaos Orphanos, Saint Panteleimon, the Transfiguration of the Saviour, Saint Aikaterini, Prophitis Ilias, the Katholikon (main church) of the Vlatadon Monastery which reflect all the tendencies of the Palaeologan Renaissance.
Criterion (i):
The mosaics of the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius and Hosios David’s (Latomou Monastery) are among the great masterpieces of Early Christian art.
Criterion (ii):
The influence of the Thessalonian churches on the development of the monumental arts was considerable first in the Byzantine and later the Serbian world, whether in the Early Christian period, the Middle Byzantine era or the Palaeologan Renaissance.
Criterion (iv):
The Christian monuments of Thessalonika are outstanding examples of churches built according to central, basilical and transitional architectural types over a period going from the 4th to the 15th century. For this reason they constitute a series which is a typological point of reference.
Integrity
All monuments
are preserved intact
, or as in the
case of the city
walls
,
with minimal losses
. The boundaries are adequate to protect the fabric of the monuments and there are buffer zones for some of them. The
continual
use of the buildings (from their foundation until today)
proved
beneficial to their state of conservation, despite certain
inevitable
interventions.
There is a risk of natural disasters such as earthquakes while the fact that the monuments are all in a developing and changing urban area may lead to pressures from time to time.
Authenticity
All monuments
,
despite
any interventions over the centuries
,
maintain
all elements
(architecture
and decoration)
of their initial
phase.
In the first quarter of the 20th century the monuments commenced to be restored and
low quality recent interventions or additions were removed (e.g. the porch
of the Church of the Holy
Apostles
and the
buttresses
of the church of Prophitis Ilias). Minor restoration projects that were always
documented were carried out (e.g. the south
dome of the
narthex
of the Church of Panagia Chalkeon). Exceptionally, a large scale restoration was carried out in the church of Saint Demetrius, after the disastrous fire of 1917. During the last
30 years
small scale rescue restorations were generally carried out.
The restoration and consolidation work as well as landscaping realised until now in the monuments of Thessalonika contributed to their maintenance and the enhancement of their authenticity.
Protection and management requirements
The properties are protected by the provisions of the Archaeological Law 3028/2002 “On the Protection of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage in general” and by separate ministerial decisions published in the Official Government Gazette. Protection and management are carried out by the Ministry of Culture, Education and Religious Affairs through the responsible regional service (Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City). The specific terms of protection are defined in detail by separate ministerial decrees for each monument.
The use of the Byzantine churches is granted to the Church of Greece (Saint Sophia, Saint Demetrius, Acheiropoietos, Saint Panteleimon, the Transfiguration of the Saviour, the Holy Apostles, Saint Aikaterini, Prophitis Ilias, Panagia Chalkeon) and to the
Ecumenical
Patriarchate (Saint Nikolaos Orphanos, Hosios David [Latomou Monastery], Vlatadon Monastery).
Restoration
of the roof of Hosios David (Latomou Monastery)
and
landscaping of the surrounding area in
2002,
launched
the
last
series of
conservation interventions
(
3rd Community
Support
Framework).
Subsequently
the following works were carried out: a) landscaping of the surrounding area in sections of the walls of Heptapyrgio, of the byzantine Bath, of Prophitis Ilias, b) consolidation of the mosaics in Rotunda, Saint Demetrius, the Holy Apostles, c) consolidation works in Acheiropoietos, Rotunda minaret, Heptapyrgio, Tower of Trigonio, and d) exemplary
restoration of
Saint
Panteleimon church
,
awarded the
Europa Nostra prize. Heptapyrgion’s use has changed: it now houses the offices of the Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City and two permanent exhibitions. Furthermore, Heptapyrgio is open to visitors with free entrance. It is also an area for outdoor events. The Tower of Trigonio is open
to the public.
In the context of the Peripheral Development Corporate Plan further restoration works are carried out on the monuments.
The
Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City
in collaboration
with the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki implements also the
project “
Prospelasis” which is intended
to facilitate
access
of people with
disabilities. The aim
of
the
Ephorate
of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City
is
to create
better conditions in order to facilitate the accessibility of monuments not only to scientific
groups but also to a wider public
.
Daily
effort is required for the protection and enhancement of the monuments
as they are integrated
in
a
modern city
,
and consequently burdened by
human activity.