country : Thailand

Brief synthesis
The Phu Phrabat Historical Park is the best representative of the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period (7th-11th century CE) in the world. In the global context, while boundary markers for sacred areas of Buddhist activities vary in materials, extensive use of stones is only found on the Khorat Plateau in Southeast Asia. The megalithic rock shelters at Phu Phrabat, which were shaped by the combined forces of glacier movement and differential erosion of the rock strata, were venerated by the prehistoric populations two millennia ago, as evidenced by the rock paintings covering the surfaces of forty-seven rock shelters depicting human figures, hand palms, animals, and geometric patterns. Following the arrival of Buddhism in the region in the 7th century, numerous Sīma stones were erected in the Khorat Plateau region, transforming the landscape of Phu Phrabat into a sacred Buddhist site used as a religious centre. Whilst the Sīma stone tradition has continued to the present day, most Sīma stones have been relocated and reused. However, the property area preserves the largest corpus in the world of in situ Sīma stones from the Dvaravati period, testifying to this tradition that once prevailed in the region.
Criterion (iii)
: Phu Phrabat preserves the largest corpus in the world of in situ Sīma stones from the Dvaravati period, with all the types of establishment patterns as prescribed in Buddhist scripture, and exhibits the majority of forms and artistic styles of this particular type of sacred boundary marker with a very clear evolutionary path. It is an exceptional testimony to the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period in a global context.
Criterion (v)
: The landscape of Phu Phrabat has been purposefully and extensively transformed by the erection of the Sīma stones over more than four centuries to fulfil Buddhist ceremonial functions, possibly linked to the forest monastic tradition. It is an outstanding example of land use that is representative of the Sīma stone tradition that once prevailed in the Khorat Plateau during the Dvaravati period.
Integrity
The property testifies to the major forms of Sīma stones and all the spatial arrangement patterns, illustrating the major evolutionary path of the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period. In the global context, the property is the most complete testimony to the Sīma stone tradition during the Dvaravati period. It is of adequate size, and all the attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value are included within its boundaries. All the adverse impacts are under control.
Authenticity
The property preserves the largest corpus in the world of Sīma stones in their original locations, with their spatial arrangement patterns unchanged, and their physical forms and decorative art untouched, providing a truthful and credible source of information for understanding the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period in terms of form and design, materials, function, location, traditions, and spirit and feeling. Since it was converted into a Buddhist religious centre in the 7th century, the site has continued to be used as such.
Protection and management requirements
The property is protected by national and local legislation and governmental regulations, including the Act on Ancient Monuments, Antiques, Objects of Art and National Museums, B.E. 2504 (1961), with its Amended Act (No. 2), B.E. 2535 (1992), and the National Reserved Forest Act, B.E. 2507 (1964).
The property is managed by a collaborative mechanism, with the Fine Arts Department of the Ministry of Culture taking the lead role, joined by representatives of the Royal Forest Department, Udon Thani Province, Ban Phue District, Muang Pan Sub-district Administration Organisation, and Klang Yai Sub-district Municipality. Mechanisms for local community participation are implemented in the management system. The site management is guided by the Master Plan for Conservation and Development of the Phu Phrabat Historical Park 2022-2026, which was developed in collaboration with the local communities. A risk preparedness plan is in place and functioning. However, Heritage Impact Assessment mechanisms need to be incorporated into the management system. Tourism management is adequate, but the carrying capacity should be established to guide site management, and measures should be adopted to prevent the spirit of the site from being disturbed by tourism.