country : Germany

Brief synthesis
The sanctuary of Wies, near Steingaden in Bavaria, is a pilgrimage church extraordinarily well-preserved in the beautiful setting of an Alpine valley, and is a perfect masterpiece of Rococo art and creative genius, as well as an exceptional testimony to a civilization that has disappeared.
The hamlet of Wies, in 1738, is said to have been the setting of a miracle in which tears were seen on a simple wooden figure of Christ mounted on a column that was no longer venerated by the Premonstratensian monks of the Abbey. A wooden chapel constructed in the fields housed the miraculous statue for some time. However, pilgrims from Germany, Austria, Bohemia, and even Italy became so numerous that the Abbot of the Premonstratensians of Steingaden decided to construct a splendid sanctuary. Consequently, work began in 1745 under the direction of the celebrated architect, Dominikus Zimmermann, who was to construct, in this pastoral setting in the foothills of the Alps, one of the most polished creations of Bavarian Rococo. The choir was consecrated in 1749, and the remainder of the church finished by 1754. That year, Dominikus Zimmermann left the city of Landsberg to settle in Wies near his masterpiece, in a new house where he died in 1766.
The church, which is oval in plan, is preceded to the west by a semi-circular narthex. Inside, twin columns placed in front of the walls support the capriciously cut-out cornice and the wooden vaulting with its flattened profile; this defines a second interior volume where the light from the windows and the oculi is cleverly diffused both directly and indirectly. To the east, a long deep choir is surrounded by an upper and a lower gallery.
A unique feature is the harmony between art and the countryside. All art forms and techniques used - architecture, sculpture, painting, stucco work, carving, ironwork, etc. - were melded by the architect into a perfect, unified whole, in order to create a diaphanous spatial structure of light and form. The remarkable stucco decoration is the work of Dominikus Zimmermann, assisted by his brother Johann Baptist -  who was the painter of the Elector of Bavaria, Max-Emmanuel, from 1720. The lively colours of the paintings bring out the sculpted detail and, in the upper areas, the frescoes and stuccowork interpenetrate to produce a light and living decor of unprecedented richness and refinement. The abundance of motifs and figures, the fluidity of the lines, the skilful opening of surfaces, and the 'lights' continually offer the observer fresh surprises. The ceilings painted in trompe-l'œil appear to open to an iridescent sky, across which, angels fly, contributing to the overall lightness of the church as a whole.
Criterion (i):
The sanctuary of Wies, a pilgrimage church constructed in the open countryside, is a perfect masterpiece of Rococo art.
Criterion (iii):
The Pilgrimage Church of Wies is an exceptional testimony of cultural and religious traditions.
Integrity
In this sparsely settled area, in complete solitude, it was possible for a religious and architectural idea to be realized unhindered. The site, therefore, contains all elements necessary for Outstanding Universal Value. There are no immediate, adverse effects of development and/or neglect.
Authenticity
The setting is completely untouched. Form and design, material and substance, use and function of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies have remained unchanged.
Protection and management requirements
A core and a buffer zone have been identified to ensure the lasting protection and sustained preservation of the visual and built integrity of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies and its immediate surroundings.
The laws and regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Free State of Bavaria guarantee the consistent protection of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies and its surroundings. The listed monument, which is situated outside the town in a protected landscape close to a nature reserve, is protected by a number of legal instruments (monument protection law, nature protection law, building and planning law). Furthermore, the regional development programme of the Free State of Bavaria contains a special clause according to which UNESCO World Heritage properties are to be protected and maintained in good condition.
The Free State of Bavaria is owner of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies. The property is managed under the responsibility of the Pilgrimage Church Foundation St Joseph. The State Construction Office Weilheim is responsible for construction issues, and the coordination between the stakeholders is organised by the site manager, who is based in the administrative district office of Weilheim.
The management system consists of a set of maintenance and conservation measures to ensure the protection of the property and the surrounding cultural landscape by sustainable agriculture. More information on visitor management is provided in the Management Plan and through the Periodic Reporting mechanism.