country : India

Brief synthesis
The ensemble of mosques, minars, and other structures in the Qutb Minar complex is an outstanding testimony to the architectural and artistic achievements of Islamic rulers after they first established their power in the Indian subcontinent in the 12th century. The complex, located at the southern fringe of New Delhi, illustrates the new rulers’ aspiration to transform India from Dar-al-Harb to Dar-al-Islam with the introduction of distinctive building types and forms.
Referred to as the Qutb mosque, the Quwwatu’l-Islam, meaning the Might of Islam, introduced to India the classic model of Islamic architecture that had developed in western Asia. The mosque constituted a large rectangular courtyard enclosed by arcades having carved pillars on three sides and an imposing five-arched screen marking the west. Incorporating temple elements such as the carved pillars and cladding characteristic of Hindu and Jain temples, it was completed by subsequent rulers – Qutb ud din Aibak and Shamsu’d-Din Iltutmish. Drawing references from their Ghurid homeland, they constructed a minar (minaret) at the south-eastern corner of the Quwwatu’l-Islam between 1199 and 1503, thereby completing the vocabulary of a typical classic Islamic mosque. Built of red and buff sandstone and eloquently carved with inscriptional bands, the Qutb Minar is the tallest masonry tower in India, measuring 72.5 metres high, with projecting balconies for calling all Muadhdhin to prayer. An iron pillar in the courtyard gave the mosque a unique Indian aesthetic.
The 13th-century square tomb of Iltutmish in the north-western part of Quwwatu’l-Islam marks the beginning of the tradition of constructing royal tombs, a practice followed as late as the Mughal era in India. The tomb-chamber is profusely carved with inscriptions and geometrical and arabesque patterns associated with Saracenic tradition. Expansions made by Allaudin Khilji to the existing ensemble between 1296 and 1311 reflect the power wielded by the monarch. In his short reign, the emperor added a massive ceremonial gateway (Alai Darwaza) south of the Qutb Minar, and also added a madarsa (place of learning). The first storey of the incomplete Alai Minar, which was envisaged to be twice the scale of the Qutb Minar, stands 25 metres high.
Criterion (iv):
T
he religious and funerary buildings in the Qutb Minar complex represent an outstanding example of the architectural and artistic achievements of early Islamic India.
Integrity
The boundary enveloping the remains of the Qutb and Alai minars, Quwwatu’l-Islam mosque with its extension, madarsa of Alauddin Khilji, tomb of Iltutmish, Alai Darwaza (ceremonial gateway), Iron Pillar, and other structures is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance, including the aspiration and vision of the Ghurid clans to establish their rule and religion in India. The state of conservation is stable and the property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.
The peripheral area of the property has mixed land use, a large tract of green area (Mehrauli Archaeological Park), and facilities to support visitor movement. No threats to the integrity of the property have been identified by the State Party.
Authenticity
The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is substantially authentic in terms of its location, forms and designs, and materials and substance. The attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are truthfully and credibly expressed, and fully convey the value of the property. To maintain the state of conservation of the property, repairs undertaken have respected the original construction, architectural, and ornamentation systems that demonstrate the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Works periodically undertaken to ensure the property’s structural and material sustainability are reversible.
Protection and management requirements
The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is owned by the Government of India and managed by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). Its peripheral area is managed by multiple stakeholders, including the ASI, Delhi Development Authority, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, and Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The overall administration of the property and its peripheral area is governed by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (1958) and its Rules (1959), Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act (2010), Delhi Municipal Corporation Act (1957), Land Acquisition Act (1894), Delhi Urban Art Commission Act (1973), Urban Land (Sealing and Regulation) Act (1976), Environmental Pollution Control Act (1986), Indian Forest Act (1927), Forest Conservation Act (1980), and Delhi Development Act (1957). Annual funds are provided by the Central Government for the overall conservation, maintenance, and management of the property.
The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is maintained, monitored, and managed by the ASI Acts and Rules through an annual conservation and development plan. To strengthen the plan, training, researchers, and experts are engaged to ensure high-quality conservation that respects the authenticity of the property. Although there is a proposal to prepare a management plan for the property that includes conservation, integrated development, visitor management, and interpretation, in the meantime the property is protected under a well-established management system.