country : Ukraine

Brief synthesis
Situated within the boundaries of the town of Chernivtsi, on the river promontory, named Mount Dominic, the architectural ensemble comprises the former Residence of the Metropolitans with its St. Ivan of Suceava Chapel; the former seminary and Seminary Church, and the former monastery with its clock tower within a garden and landscaped park. The Residence, with a dramatic fusion of architectural references, expresses the 19th century cultural identity of the Orthodox Church within the Austro-Hungarian Empire during a period of religious and cultural toleration. In the 19th century, historicist architecture could convey messages about its purpose and the Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans is an excellent example.
Criterion (ii)
: Chernivtsi architectural ensemble of the Residence of the Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans reflects social, economical and cultural influences on the development of architecture and urban planning since ancient times, the Middle Ages, absolutism and the Gruender period. The complex represents a version of 19th century historicist architecture and planning.
Criterion (iii)
: The Residence bears exceptional testimony to the cultural tradition of the Orthodox Church which is signified by the use of Byzantine forms for the domed cruciform church, while the decorative patterns, incorporated in the tiled roofs of the complex signify the folk culture of the people. The prosperous Bukovinian Metropolitanate with episcopacies on territories of Southern and Central Europe ceased to exist in 1940.
Criterion (iv)
: The ensemble of the Residence, combining elements of national, Byzantine, Gothic and Baroque architecture, is an outstanding example of 19th century historicist architecture, design and planning, expressing the cultural identity of the Orthodox Church within the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Integrity
The condition of integrity is satisfactory. The property includes within its boundary all elements necessary to express its cultural value and all of the components are adequately preserved.
Authenticity
The conditions of authenticity are generally adequate. The original shaped wooden ceiling of the Synod Hall was lost to fire in 1942 and was replaced in the 1950s. The roof has been gradually replaced using quality colour-glazed roof tiles manufactured according to the original patterns and imported from Austria. The change of function of the ensemble, initially being the Residence of Metropolitans and becoming a university did not unduly affect its authenticity.
Protection and management requirements
The Residence of the Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans was declared a National Park in 1945. The property on its 8 ha site was transferred to Yuriy Fedkovich Chernivtsi National University under the Ministry of Education of Ukraine in 1955.  The nominated property and its buffer zone are protected at both regional and national level by regulations and laws. A protection contract is signed annually with the Chernivtsi City Council, covering the responsibilities of the University to the property in terms of use and maintenance. The State funding “Comprehensive program on Preservation of historical architecture in Chernivtsi for 2009-2015” provides a basis for the systematic conservation and management of the property and for implementing protection measures in compliance with national standards for the protection of World Heritage sites. The General Development Plan for Chernivtsi gives main outlines for proper management of the property with special attention to the growth of tourist infrastructure as one of the major branches of the municipal economy. The outline Management Plan prepared in 1998 is to be reviewed every five years. A separate Tourism management plan is to be developed for the property to tackle the long-term consequences of the tourism pressure. A conservation plan will be developed for the gardens and park behind the Residence.