country : Bulgaria

Brief synthesis
The frescos of the Ivanovo churches reveal an exceptional artistry and a remarkable artistic sensitivity for 14th century painting and Bulgarian medieval art; they are an important achievement in the Christian art of South-Eastern Europe. Posterior to the Khora monastery mosaics (Karia Djami) of 1303 - 10, these frescoes, by their very expressiveness surpass any other historical monuments discovered, characteristic of the Palaeologues style. Neo-classical in spirit and in elements of their subjects, the frescoes represent a departure from the canons of Byzantine iconography. They show close ties with expressive Hellenistic art and a clear preference for the nude, the landscape, an architectural background in a composition, drama, an emotional atmosphere - qualities which combine to make an exceptional masterpiece of the Tarnovo school of painting and monumental art.
The five historical monuments in this group (chapels, churches, etc.), dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, serve as examples that pave the way for the distinctive character development, and mastery in the art of the Second Bulgarian State /1187-1396/. The richness, the variety of the cells, chapels, churches, monastery complexes, the original architectural solutions - all set in a magnificent natural environment - confirm the value of this extraordinary historical grouping.
Criterion (ii):
Many churches, chapels, monasteries and cells were cut into the natural rock along the Rusenski Lom river, during the 13-14th centuries. The "Church" frescoes reveal an exceptional artistry and a remarkable artistic sensitivity for 14th century painting and Bulgarian medieval art; they are an important achievement in the Christian art of South-Eastern Europe. Neo-classical in spirit and in elements of their subjects, the frescoes represent a departure from the canons of Byzantine iconography. They show close ties with expressive Hellenistic art and a clear preference for the nude, the landscape, an architectural background in a composition, drama, an emotional atmosphere - qualities which combine to make an exceptional masterpiece.
Criterion (iii):
The extensive complexes of monasteries were built between the time of the Second Bulgarian State /1187-1396/ and the conquest of Bulgaria by the Ottoman Empire. The five historical monuments in this group, dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, the richness, the variety of the cells, chapels, churches, monastery complexes, the original architectural solutions - all of that set in a magnificent natural environment - confirm the value of this extraordinary historical grouping.
Integrity
The property encompasses within its boundaries all the components necessary to convey its outstanding universal value but the rock massif, where the churches are situated, has serious stability problems. Over the years a continuous programme of research, and scientific, technical and design projects, have focussed on strengthening and stabilising the rock formation. A programme was carried out for the "Investigation, identification, stabilization and waterproofing of the rock massif" for The Church of the Holy Virgin. All of the statistical analyses are based on processing meteorological and instrument data, and studies.
Authenticity
Created in the natural cavities of a karst massif, the authenticity of shape, material and substance of the Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo has been preserved. Urgent conservation work has been completed on the valuable 13th and 14th century murals, whilst cleaning, stabilization and presentation of The Church of the Holy Virgin murals has also been carried out. This involved minimal retouching work, and the maximum retention of the original.
In consequence of a rock collapse in the early 20th century, the 13th century ceiling murals from the buried church of St. Archangels, have been rescued and moved to a new substrate. The first stage of work on the 14th century murals of the collapsed St. Todor Church has also been completed.
Protection and management requirements
Through National Legislation the property has been protected, as a 'Reserve' since 1965 (Official Gazette No. 84 of 1965). Management is implemented through the Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No.19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties.
Protection is also afforded by Ordinance No. 17 of the President of the Committee for Culture on Definition of Boundaries and Regimes of Use and Protection of Immovable Cultural Monuments outside Populated Areas (Official Gazette No. 35 of 1979); and The Protected Areas Act (Official Gazette No. 133 of 11 November 1998, as amended and supplemented).
In order to strengthen and stabilize the rock formation, there is a need to pursue the implementation of the conservation measures.