country : India

Brief
synthesis
The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas is a serial property comprised of the three most representative Hoysala-style temple complexes constructed between the 12th and 13th centuries in the present State of Karnataka, namely the Channakeshava Temple in Belur, the Hoysalesvara Temple in Halebidu, and the Keshava Temple in Somanathapura.
Through the careful selection of temple features from the past kingdoms and their integration with those of contemporary temples in southern India, the architects and artists created a new style of temple and, through that process, helped forge a distinct identity for the Hoysala kingdom. The Hoysala-style is a combination of several features, including a stellate sanctum, a circumambulatory platform following the shape of the sanctum, a multi-tiered frieze, a thematically arranged sculptural gallery of religious, epic, and other stories along the circumambulatory platform, extensive sculptures and stone carvings that cover the entire exterior surface, and sculptures of the legend of Sala killing a tiger serving as the quintessence of the temples. This style successfully set the Hoysala temples apart from those of other contemporary kingdoms and dynasties.
The numerous signatures left by the artists who created these Hoysala-style temples – an unusual practice in the Indian subcontinent – points to their high degree of artistic agency and the prestigious standing they enjoyed in Hoysala society.
Criterion (i):
The creation of the Hoysala style of temple architecture and the artistic achievement of the sculptural art of the temple complexes are exceptional testimonies to the outstanding creativity and inventive genius of the Hoysala people, as expressed in the combination of the stellate temple plan with a platform, frieze, thematic arrangement of the sculptures along the circumambulation, and profusion of hyper-real sculptures over the entire architectural surface.
Criterion (ii):
The Hoysala-style temple form, motivated by the need for establishing a distinct identity, was the successful outcome of the interchange of human values that developed as the result of creative modifications of the plans and elements of the temple architecture prevalent elsewhere, complemented with original innovations. It emerged from the considered and informed choices of elements and features found in other parts of the Indian subcontinent, selected in very conscious ways with a clear understanding of the desired outcome. The Hoysala-style, as demonstrated by the property, exerted a lasting influence on later temple construction in the region and beyond.
Criterion (iv):
The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas are an exceptional testimony to the Hoysala-style temples, which illustrate a significant stage in the historical development of Hindu temple architecture. It is an exceptional physical testimony to the diversity of religious architecture in India.
Integrity
The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas contains all the attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value while all the supporting and functionally linked elements are included in the buffer zone. The chronological integrity of the whole series is well demonstrated by the component parts, which cover the most significant periods of Hoysala-style temple construction from its initial phase to its high point. The sculptural and structural variations in the three temple complexes complement each other, collectively illustrating the wholeness and richness of the Hoysala-style. While the integrity of some component parts has been affected by past alterations, such as the demolition of the superstructures of the Channakeshava and Hoysalesvara temples and the loss of the Hoysalesvara Temple’s enclosure walls, the key features that represent the Hoysala-style remain unimpaired. All the attributes conveying the Outstanding Universal Values are legally protected, with major pressures on them controlled. Channakeshava Temple (Belur) is a living temple and the buffer zone contextualises the area where the community is still engaged with temple rituals and activities. It would benefit from some improvement regarding the historical remains and significant views. In Halebidu, the buffer zone of Hoysalesvara Temple includes the wider setting of the tank and other nationally protected monuments. In Somanathapura, the wider setting around Keshava Temple enhances the protection of the property.
Authenticity
The attributes that convey the Outstanding Universal Value for the Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas have a high degree of authenticity, both collectively and for each individual component part, and represent the most significant temples of the Hoysala cultural era. The locations, forms, materials, uses, traditions, spirit, and feeling of the property are mostly intact. The key attributes that define the Hoysala style – including the plans and forms of the various structures, the exterior and interior decorations, the sculptures, stone carvings, and friezes – have a high level of authenticity. While several changes over the centuries have affected the property, such as the loss of religious activities at the Hoysalesvara Temple in Halebidu and Keshava Temple in Somanathapura, the property meets the conditions of authenticity. A continuity of worship, rituals and festivals is to be noticed at Channakeshava Temple (Belur), since its inception in 1117 CE. The three component parts are built with chloritic schist and reflect the features such as stellate plans, horizontal friezes of the adhisthana, artists' signatures, sculptural panels and carvings that became the hallmark of this period.
Protection and management requirements
The three component parts of the Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas are all protected monuments under the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (Amendment and Validation 2010) and other national and state laws. The component parts and the buffer zones are regulated by the provisions made in the 2010 amendment of this Act.
Overall management of the property is undertaken by the Apex Committee, which is chaired by the Chief Secretary of the Government of Karnataka and supported by the Director General, the Additional Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India, the Regional Director, and the Regional Commissioner, as well as the heads of relevant departments under the Government of Karnataka. The Apex Committee monitors and reviews management issues and policies, coordinates and implements the site management plan, reviews conservation interventions, and secures relevant funds. A nodal officer has been appointed to coordinate and implement the decisions of the Apex Committee. Under the Apex Committee are the district-level committees established to manage the buffer zones: the Hassan District Committee for Channakeshava Temple and Hoysalesvara Temple; and the Mysuru District Committee for Keshava Temple.
The three component parts are owned and managed by the Archaeological Survey of India, while the buffer zones are jointly managed by the National Monument Authority, the Department of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage, the Government of Karnataka with its relevant departments, local authorities, and private owners. The religious activities at Channakeshava Temple are managed by the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Department of the Government of Karnataka.
The management system is guided by the site management plan, which sets out the vision and lays out six objectives in terms of monument conservation; guidelines and policies for development; continuity of artistic and cultural tradition; sustainable tourism management; cultural, environmental, mobility and social impact assessment; and education, outreach and awareness. A set of strategies with associated regulations is stipulated, and there is an action plan for achieving the vision and objectives. Heritage Impact Assessment and risk preparedness mechanisms are in place. The involvement of the community for the conservation and management of the property should be encouraged, and a holistic interpretation plan and tourists’ amenities should be developed and implemented.