country : Germany

Brief synthesis

Established on the shores of Lake Schwerin, the Schwerin Residence Ensemble is an architectural and landscape ensemble which fits very precisely within the context of the emergence and development of the historicist style in Europe, in the second half of the 19th century, and particularly in the German kingdoms and principalities. The establishment of the seat of Grand Ducal power in the 19th century led to the implementation in the city of Schwerin of an architectural and landscape programme that illustrates all the civil and religious functions of a capital city that was the seat of a monarch.

As result of the diversity of the architectural programmes, the ensemble provides a wide spectrum of buildings, which reflect the 19th-century historicist style, and in certain cases refer to the more regional “Johann-Albrecht” style, connecting the programmes even more closely to the history of the Grand Duchy. The choice made to establish the seat next to lakes and ponds, creating a landscape in which the architecture and gardens are reflected in the water, is a perfect illustration of the romantic taste in 19th-century Europe.

Criterion (iv): The Schwerin Residence Ensemble fits within the context of the emergence and development of the historicist style during the 19th century in Europe. Remarkably well-preserved, it constitutes an outstanding European royal residence ensemble of the 19th century by way of the richness and diversity of its architecture and landscape features, which express the whole spectrum of historicism, from neo-Renaissance to neo-Baroque and neo-Classicism, neo-Gothic and the regional “Johann-Albrecht” historicist style.

Integrity

The boundaries of the Schwerin Residence Ensemble encompass all the landscape, architectural and stylistic attributes, as well as the perspectives and visual axes, necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The property in its landscape context presents the necessary characteristics to express the importance of this well-preserved historicist ensemble; it is not threatened by any unfavourable development or abandonment.

Authenticity

The location and setting, or form of the thirty-eight elements comprising the Schwerin Residence Ensemble have been preserved. These elements have evolved over time, and in many cases their use has changed, resulting essentially in adaptations and alterations to interior arrangements. The general design, structures and materials of the ensemble have been preserved. The relationship of the buildings to their landscape setting, whether with the gardens or the lakes and ponds, or with the perspectives and vistas, has also been preserved.

Protection and management requirements

The thirty-eight elements comprising the Schwerin Residence Ensemble are protected at Federal level and by the Monument Protection Act (DSchG M-V) of the State of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The elements are identified as properties whose preservation is a matter of public interest. The Federal Building Code (Baugesetzbuch – BauGB, 1960, amended in 2017) provides the basis for land use and urban planning; it includes provisions for the preservation of properties inscribed on the World Heritage List. Furthermore, the laws and regulations relating to the protection of nature and landscapes, and of water resources, also apply within the boundaries of the property and its buffer zone.

A management plan has been prepared to be used as a control and planning instrument. It will have to be periodically assessed and updated. The World Heritage Coordination Office, supported by expert and advisory groups, is a crucial element to ensure the coordination and effectiveness of the management of the property. A rigorous strategy for the conservation of the buildings in the ensemble, and particularly of the interior layouts of those open to the public, and for the management of tourist flows inside the property and in the city, is essential to ensure that the Outstanding Universal Value of the property is maintained in the long-term.