country : Chile

Brief
synthesis
The northern coast of the Atacama Desert, an arid and hostile habitat in northernmost Chile, was home to the Chinchorro, a society of marine hunter-gatherers who lived here from approximately 7400 BP to 2840 BP (5450 BCE to 890 BCE). They successfully adapted to the extreme environmental conditions of a hyper-arid coastal desert in the rugged Coastal Cordillera by using the nearby rich marine resources. Archaeological sites associated with the Chinchorro culture are recognized for having the oldest known artificially mummified human bodies.
The serial property is comprised of three component parts – Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica and Colón 10 (both located in an urban setting), and Desembocadura de Camarones (located in a rural environment) – which include the archaeological remains of settlements, cemeteries, and dense shell middens, as well as a natural setting similar to that faced by the Chinchorro people. These remains provide evidence of sea harvesting activities and land occupation that illustrate the technological and spiritual complexity of this society from its coastal beginnings to its disappearance.
The cemeteries reveal that the Chinchorro innovated continuously in their mummification practices to create artificial mummies that possessed extraordinary material, sculptural, and aesthetic qualities that reflected the fundamental social role of the dead in human society.
Criterion (iii):
The cultural remains left behind by the Chinchorro people, including their artefacts, mummies, and cemeteries, stand as a testimony to their belief system and ideas about the afterlife, and as such bear a unique testimony to this cultural tradition. The Chinchorro cemeteries reveal artificially as well as naturally mummified bodies, both in exceptionally good states of conservation due to the very dry environment. The Chinchorro innovated continuously in their artificial mummification practices, revealing technical ability by dismembering and reassembling bodies to create artificial mummies possessing extraordinary material, sculptural, and aesthetic qualities.
Criterion (v):
The Chinchorro culture occupied one of the most arid places in the world, the coastal areas of the Atacama Desert. The property presents an outstanding example of human interaction with the environment, with highly specialized use of land and sea resources. The marine hunter-gatherer groups adapted to a harsh environment that had minimal fresh water and plant resources and developed simple and efficient technologies to harvest from the ocean. Culturally, they flourished for thousands of years in a vast, hyper-dry territory and the archaeological evidence of their sea harvesting and land occupation can be found in settlements, cemeteries, and shell middens as well as in the environmental setting itself.
Integrity
The integrity of the property is based on the cultural remains left behind by the Chinchorro people, particularly artificially mummified remains, and on this people’s adaptation to one of the most arid places in the world, where they flourished for thousands of years. The serial component parts were selected as the most representative and best preserved of all the Chinchorro sites in northern Chile and southern Peru, for their complementary nature, and for their tangible attributes that provide a comprehensive view of the Chinchorro culture. Issues with site encroachment in the Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica component part have been resolved, and are in the process of being addressed at the Desembocadura de Camarones component. Part of the Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica component has been affected by public works. Further explanation on distribution and interrelationships of the archaeological sites located within the property component parts, including the remains already removed through excavation, as well as those still
in situ
and detected through different surveying techniques, would enhance the integrity of the property.
Authenticity
The conditions of authenticity of the Settlement and Artificial Mummification of the Chinchorro Culture in terms of the attributes of material, design and substance have been met. The knowledge of the Chinchorro culture comes from studies of archaeological sites endorsed by a number of national and international scientific conferences and publications. Archaeological sites where no reconstructions have been undertaken retain a high degree of authenticity. It is supposed that most of the property’s archaeological artefacts remain
in situ
, unexcavated and untouched for thousands of years and therefore are authentic.
Protection
and management requirements
At the national level, the Ministry of Culture, the Arts and Heritage is officially in charge of Chile’s cultural heritage. The Undersecretariat of Cultural Heritage is responsible for developing cultural policies, including those associated with World Heritage properties. The National Monuments Council, which is part of the Ministry of Culture, the Arts and Heritage, is the technical body in charge of supervising and maintaining National Monuments, which is the legal category protecting the Chinchorro archaeological sites. Any changes to the sites must be authorized by this council. The National Cultural Heritage Service acts as technical advisor to World Heritage properties in Chilean territory through the National Centre for World Heritage Sites, which supports the work of site administrators. At the local level, the Chinchorro Marka Corporation is the body in charge of the property’s management system. The current and proposed legal protection of the serial property is based at the national level on Law No. 17288 of National Monuments (1970, substantially modified in 2005 and currently under additional review). At the regional level, Decree No. 4867 (1967) of the Ministry of Education declares all archaeological and palaeontological sites in the Arica and Parinacota Region to be Historical Monuments. The protection established by this Decree covers the archaeological sites in all three component parts of the serial property.
The Desembocadura de Camarones component part and its buffer zone will be protected in the future under the Nature Sanctuary category of Law No. 17288 of National Monuments. The Desembocadura de Camarones component part is protected by Decree No. 240 (2014) of the Ministry of National Defence and the Armed Forces Undersecretariat, which regulates the use of the seashore by non-industrial fishers. Processes related to the nature sanctuary declaration and the renewal of the Regulatory plan of the city of Arica and the Cuya-Caleta Camarones Sectional Plan are still pending and need to be finalized.
The ownership of the three component parts of the property and the two buffer zones is a combination of public and private tenure.
The management system and management plan are comprehensive, well structured, and generally inclusive in terms of stakeholder participation, but they are still under development. The Management Plan of the property (2020-2026) is currently being established. Priority should be given to finalizing, approving and implementing the Management Plan as well as completing and making operational the projected monitoring system.
Systemic documentation and inventorying of the archaeological information already collected needs to be addressed, as well as documentation of areas with potential interest for future investigation. Priority should be given to the development of conservation measures focused on general maintenance and on the identification and rescue of unprotected archaeological remains on the surface. The installation of the basic infrastructure to
assure
the safety of visitors and the security of the property, the strengthening of general maintenance and the development and application of a Heritage Impact Assessment system are priorities to be tackled. The ethical issues related to the treatment of human remains needs to be addressed. Community outreach activities are key to the success of future management of the property. It will be important to continue these efforts and include in the decision-making processes local stakeholders as well as any community that may have an interest in and connection with the property.