country : Saudi Arabia

Brief
synthesis
Ḥimā Cultural Area is located in southwest Saudi Arabia on one of the ancient caravan routes of the Arabian Peninsula. The
region
contains some of the most significant and ancient desert wells in the Middle East. The passage of large armies and myriad caravans through the region has resulted in an unequalled historical "library on rock", comprising vast numbers of rock inscriptions and petroglyphs that reflect Arabia’s history over the duration of the Holocene period. These spectacular petroglyphs cover a period of at least 7000 years, continuing up to the last 30 years. Most are preserved in pristine condition. Inscriptions are in different scripts, including Musnad, Aramaic-Nabatean, South-Arabian, Thamudic, Greek and Arabic.
Criterion (iii):
The
Ḥimā Cultural Area bears an exceptional testimony to a number of ancient traditions over the span of many millennia, chronicling the history of the Arab people more effectively than any other place and thus
representing an immense outdoor library of that history. The property bears an exceptional
testimony to a long
series of cultural traditions, arguably from the Paleolithic and at the very least to the Neolithic and stretching from then until the present day. Over this long period, the people passing through the region left a pristine record of their presence and passage in the form of rock inscriptions and rock art, the former in some cases describing their lived context and environment, the themes in the rock art reflecting the changing character of the environment and how they adapted to it.
Integrity
The size of the Ḥimā Cultural Area is adequate to ensure the integrity of the property. The six component parts that comprise the serial property – possibly containing more than 100,000 petroglyphs – encompass the region’s largest and most significant concentrations of rock art and rock inscription sites. The property is free from development except for site protection works and the small township of Ḥimā. The archaeological resources within the property remain almost totally intact, as well as the ‘untouched’ nature of the desert landscape. Due to the highly arid environment of the Ḥimā Cultural Area and the Bedouin custodianship since time immemorial, its
Outstanding Universal Value has been exceptionally well preserved.
Authenticity
The rock art and rock inscriptions within the property retain the qualities of their original form and design, and notably remain in their
original location and setting within the desert environment. To some extent even their traditional function within a cultural tradition has been preserved.
The authenticity of the petroglyphs is clear from their patinated condition, state of weathering and fractures in rock panels that have been determined to postdate the images. Other scientific work as well as stylistic similarities with direct-dated rock art elsewhere in Saudi Arabia also confirm their authenticity. Some engravings have been “refreshed,” as certain sections have been re-pecked. However, most of these were done in ancient times and could be considered part of their authenticity, as they manifest the active role these images played in the lives of people. The rock inscriptions are fresher and brighter than most of the rock art. There are several different recognizable types of script, the older ones being more patinated. Some of the inscriptions describe events that occurred at known dates. The location, width and depth of the wells at Bi’r Ḥimā are original, but the above-ground walling is recently built to ensure safety.
The well walls and paths around the site are recent additions that are fully reversible.
Protection
and
management requirements
The
Ḥimā Cultural Area and its buffer zone are protected and managed by the Heritage Commission, Ministry of Culture. They are in the ownership of the Government of Saudi Arabia. The rock art and inscriptions within the property are protected as an archaeological monument. The property is protected at the highest level within its jurisdiction by Royal Decree and by the Law for Antiquities.
For the effective monitoring, conservation, protection and management of the property, a database of maps and consistent site records for all sites inventoried within the property and the buffer zone are being compiled and made internally accessible to staff. The Management Plan (2018) includes clear sets of objectives and responsibilities identified, though there is a need for certain specialized staff with training in heritage management, archaeology and rock art conservation. The Tourism Management Plan (2018) addresses the potential growth in tourism in a sensible and practical way. A conservation management strategy should be created, implemented and integrated into the management plan of the property along with a monitoring program that identifies measurable key indicators, periodicity and responsible authorities. Capacity building is required in the fields of archaeology, heritage management and rock art conservation in order to implement the monitoring, conservation and management plans and programs. Heritage Impact Assessments are required to be carried out for any projects related to tourism activities and infrastructures at Najd Khayran before they are implemented.