country : Iran (Islamic Republic of)

Brief synthesis
Caravanserais were roadside inns located along ancient trade and pilgrimage routes, providing shelter, food, and water for caravans, pilgrims and other travellers. The serial property comprises fifty-four caravanserais considered to be the most famous, influential, and valuable examples of this type of building in Iran. Together, they showcase the evolution and diversity of caravanserais in Iran, in different historical stages. They exemplify a wide range of architectural styles, adaptation to climatic conditions (especially desert areas) and use of construction materials.
The development and evolution of the property from the Achaemenid period (559-330 BC) to the Qajar period (1794-1925) shows the stability and importance of the caravanserais in Iranian history. The Persian Caravanserai bears testimony to travel traditions before the industrial age and the development of modern roads and railways. In addition to offering multiple services to travellers, caravanserais also had a social function as they were places where people from different ethnicities, languages and religions gathered, albeit for short periods of time. For centuries, they contributed to the exchange of human values, ideas, and knowledge.
Criterion (ii):
The fifty-four component parts of the Persian Caravanserai serial property reflect the diversity and variety of caravanserais built along the ancient roads of Iran for over two millennia. Caravanserais were the meeting point for travellers, merchants, and many other people from different cultures, facilitating the exchange of human values.
Criterion (iii):
The Persian Caravanserai bears testimony to the continuity of the Persian tradition of building caravanserais from the 5th century BC to the early years of the 20th century. The network of caravanserais and its related infrastructures in different time periods were of significant importance for the expansion of trading among different areas of the known world as well as the growth of economic and cultural interactions among various peoples.
Integrity
The fifty-four caravanserais are spread over a wide network of historical roads, across thousands of kilometres, and in very different climate and geographical locations. Some of the component parts constitute archaeological sites whereas others retain their original function as temporary accommodation and resting places for travellers.
The conditions of integrity of the Persian Caravanserai are met as the state of conservation of most component parts is adequate, however regular maintenance and conservation works are needed, particular for caravanserais currently not in use and exposed to the effects of weathering in harsh climatic conditions. Ancillary buildings located outside of the caravanserais but important for their functioning – such as water cisterns, tombs and kilns – contribute to the integrity of the property, must be equally conserved and would benefit to be included in the boundaries of the property along with the immediate setting of these caravanserais.
The location and setting of each caravanserai were determinant for its architectural design, for example in response to climatic conditions, availability of water or defence needs. Controlling development in their immediate setting is therefore a continued priority for the conservation and management of the property.
Authenticity
The Persian Caravanserai meets the conditions of authenticity in terms of form and design, materials and substance and location and setting. Some of the caravanserais still keep their historical function as resting places for pilgrims and traders. Other have been adapted to new functions and have had different degrees of alterations made to their form and design, which overall have not compromised their authenticity. The caravanserais that are preserved as archaeological sites enjoy higher degrees of authenticity.
Past reconstructions and interventions in some of the caravanserais were not based on complete and detailed documentation but were undertaken using traditional materials and building techniques, making it difficult to distinguish between old and new fabric.
Recent and ongoing conservation interventions follow good conservation practices with regards to differentiating new materials and substance from original ones (mostly stone and bricks), following traditional building methods as well as relying on trusted documentation.
Protection and management requirements
All component parts of The Persian Caravanserai property have been inscribed on the National Cultural Heritage List and are protected by different legislative instruments. Buffer zones are subject to regulations that prohibit any damaging or disturbing activity such as polluting industrial activities or garbage accumulation. By law, the Iranian Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts (IMCHTH) is the responsible authority for the conservation of all artistic, historical and cultural monuments and sites within the country. For the purpose of managing the property, the IMCHTH has established the Persian Caravanserai Cultural Heritage Base, under the Deputy of Cultural Heritage.
The work of the Persian Caravanserai Base is supported by two committees: the Technical Committee and the Steering Committee – and by local technical offices. The Technical Committee is a consultant committee which provides advice on technical details such as interventions or use of materials. It consists of experienced specialists from various fields including restoration and conservation, tourism, handicrafts, anthropology, archaeology, road engineering, and architecture. The Steering Committee is composed of representatives of different institutions involved in the management of the property.
All caravanserais included in the property have individual restoration plans. In addition, caravanserais located within cities and villages are taken into consideration in urban and rural master plans. The provisions included in those plans in relation to the caravanserais and their buffer zones must be approved by the IMCHTH. Local communities are involved in the management of the caravanserais that are located in cities or within the vicinity of villages.
Strengthening the management plan for the property as a whole to include clear management objectives, details on the governance arrangements, information on the coordination of the actions of the different actors, a clear definition of the decision-making processes, the inclusion of disaster risk-preparedness, and a comprehensive interpretation and tourism strategies would enhance the conservation and management of the property.