country : South Africa

Brief synthesis
Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave are three widely dispersed archaeological sites located in the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces of South Africa. Two of them, Sibhudu Cave and Diepkloof Rock Shelter, are located about ten kilometres from the current shoreline, while the Pinnacle Point Site Complex is located directly on the coast. These sites provide the most varied and best-preserved record known of the development of modern human behaviour, reaching back as far as 162,000 years. Symbolic thought and advanced technologies are exemplified by evidence of ochre processing, engraved patterns on ochre and bone, estuarine shellfish beads for body decoration, decorated ostrich eggshells, lithic technologies for advanced projectile weapons, heat treatment of stone for toolmaking, and microliths. This serial property contributes to the understanding of the origin of behaviourally modern humans, their cognitive abilities and cultures, and the climatic transitions that they survived.
Criterion (iii):
The archaeological layers at the Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave provide exceptional evidence of behavioural and palaeoenvironmental developments in the Middle Stone Age. They contain early evidence of symbolic thought and advanced technologies. The great variety of materials, the early dates, and the excellent state of conservation make the evidence of this important step in human development exceptional.
Criterion (iv):
Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave preserve exceptionally well-stratified and well-dated sedimentary records of ancient human life dating from about 162,000 to 38,000 years ago. The development of modern human behaviour and complex cognition are illustrated by the evidence of abstract thinking, the ability to plan and strategize, and technological innovation, including, for example, the preparation and use of adhesives and the heat treatment of lithic materials.
Criterion (v):
Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave offer some of the most important evidence known for the consistent exploitation of coastal resources during the Middle and Late Pleistocene. As current sea levels rise due to climate change, much of the ancient record of human coastal resource use has been obliterated or is in grave danger. As such, the excellent state of conservation of these rare sites is pivotal for preserving evidence of palaeoclimates and palaeoenvironments.
Integrity
The property includes all the attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value, and is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features that convey its significance. All three component parts contain long stratigraphic sequences of human occupation that together cover a time span of about 124,000 years, from 162,000 to 38,000 years ago. Preservation conditions, even for organic material at the Sibhudu Cave, are very good. Favourable depositional processes have allowed the steady accumulation of archaeologically significant deposits with little or no loss due to natural erosion or human or animal activities. The views from the sites are generally undisturbed. Archaeological excavations have been conducted according to the highest international standards. All remains have been carefully curated and catalogued in national collections, and their significance and the interpretations based upon them have been reported and published in international journals.
Authenticity
The cultural values of the property are truthfully and credibly expressed through its attributes. The stratigraphic sequences and the dating of the different deposits, as excavated and documented by several international multidisciplinary teams of experts and peer reviewed at the time of publication, confirm the authenticity of the archaeological contexts and remains that constitute evidence of modern human behaviour.
Protection and management requirements
Legal protection of the property is based principally on the World Heritage Convention Act, No. 49 of 1999, and the National Heritage Resources Act, No. 25 of 1999, which protect the three component parts and provide for a system of Heritage Impact Assessment. The National Environmental Management Act, No. 107 of 1998, also includes a system of impact assessment.
The management of the Western Cape component parts is coordinated and hosted at the provincial level by the Member (minister) of the Executive Council of Cultural Affairs and Sport, and the management of the KwaZulu-Natal component part is coordinated and hosted by the KwaZulu-Natal Amafa and Research Institute. The two authorities will jointly serve as the overall Management Authority through the establishment of a Joint Management Committee. Each component part will have a Site Management Committee based in the local context. The World Heritage Convention Committee of South Africa advises on issues related to properties inscribed on the World Heritage List. Integrated Conservation Management Plans have been developed, as is required under the World Heritage Convention Act of the State Party. Stakeholders and the local communities are well integrated in the management process. The component parts are privately owned, which makes the formalisation of relationships with the legal owners through heritage agreements an important step to be completed as soon as possible.