country : Bulgaria

Brief synthesis
The Thracian tomb of Kazanlak is a unique aesthetic and artistic work, a masterpiece of the Thracian creative spirit. This monument is the only one of its kind anywhere in the world. The exceptionally well preserved frescos and the original condition of the structure reveal the remarkable evolution and high level of culture and pictorial art in Hellenistic Thrace.
Criterion (i):
The Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak is the masterpiece of the Thracian creative spirit.
Criterion (iii):
The Kazanlak frescoes testify to high level of culture and pictorial art in Thracia.
Criterion (iv):
The Kazanlak frescoes represent a significant stage in the development of Hellenistic funerary art.
Integrity
The integrity of the site is intact. The defined boundaries and buffer zone, and the location of the Tomb in a park area, provides a secure environment for the property. The property encompasses within its boundaries all the components that convey the outstanding universal value. The Tomb is protected from the negative effects of visitors, through offering access to the nearby museum that contains a copy of the tomb architecture and its fresco decoration.
Authenticity
The Tomb meets the requirements for authenticity as the construction and walls remain in their original condition, without modification or addition, and its frescoes are very well preserved. At the time of inscription, the Tomb was secured under a permanent protective building, and its principle cultural value - the exclusive mural decoration - was fully preserved. In this process, the murals were cleaned and strengthened. Using techniques that did not violate their authenticity, they were not retouched or additionally filled. Air conditioning was installed to ensure a constant temperature.
Protection and management requirements
The management is implemented by virtue of:
- Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No.19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties;
- the Tomb's preservation and visiting regime prescribed by the National Institute for preservation of the immovable cultural properties.