country : Jordan

Brief synthesis
Umm Al-Jimāl, in present-day northern Jordan, preserves the vestiges of a rural settlement that developed organically on the site of an earlier Roman settlement around the 5th century CE and functioned until the end of the 8th century CE, when permanent settlement at the site ceased. Composed of clusters of multi-storey houses with courtyards arranged in three neighbourhoods, the town included sixteen churches of different types. Its layout and distinctive basaltic architecture of mostly domestic and religious character reflect local Hauranian building styles and designs rooted in pragmatism, cost-effectiveness and durability. A few notable well-preserved examples of earlier Roman imperial-type military buildings, which were incorporated into the structure of the town in the Byzantine period after being re-purposed, testify to the resilience of local traditions. The town formed part of a broader agricultural landscape that included a complex water catchment system, composed of a network of reservoirs and channels connecting the settlement to the nearby wadi, that ensured irrigation of the fields. Umm Al-Jimāl bears testimony to the rural way of life on the Hauran plateau in the Byzantine and Early Islamic periods, and epitomises the Hauranian culture with its agro-pastoral identity, reflecting the social values and cultural traditions of the Hauranian people. It provides a window into the hinterland of the imperial capitals and urban centres of the time.
Criterion (iii):
As a typical rural Hauranian settlement that developed around agricultural and animal herding activities on the Hauran basaltic plateau, Umm Al-Jimāl is one of the most representative examples of the rural lifestyle of the Hauranian people, reflecting the key aspects of their cultural traditions and social values embodied in the well-preserved distinctive basalt architecture. By preserving the local architectural character and cultural traditions over centuries despite political or religious change, the property testifies to the resilience of the Hauranian culture.
Integrity
The property encompasses all the attributes of the settlement, including elements of the water catchment system, that are enclosed within the stone town wall. Preserved purposefully in a ruined state, these vestiges are in satisfactory overall condition, but in many cases the structures are not secured and some attributes remain vulnerable due to the lack of maintenance. The northern section of the property that has been left “untouched” entirely needs attention. The integrity of the broader setting of Umm Al-Jimāl has been compromised, as the agricultural landscape that once supported the existence of the settlement has been transformed and the ancient cemeteries damaged. The wadi rehabilitation project to the west of the site has heavily affected the setting of the property. Some modern structures within the buffer zone further compromise the visual integrity of the property.
Authenticity
The property is authentic in its form, design, and materials. Only a few of more than 170 structures in Umm Al-Jimāl have been investigated archaeologically. Restoration interventions have been kept to the minimum and include mostly consolidation; in a few cases anastylosis was completed. The only reconstructed House 119 serves as a visitor centre and a site museum. The water catchment system has been revitalised with a modern hose delivery system that mirrors the ancient channels. The agricultural landscape setting of the property has been transformed in result of contemporary urban developments, and the ancient burial grounds located outside the settlement’s wall were damaged. The rehabilitation of the wadi to the west of the site has further negatively affected the setting of the property.
Protection and management requirements
The site of Umm Al-Jimāl is a National Property and Protected Area since 1939, designated as “Antiquities Protectorate”. It is owned by the State and its boundaries are registered with the Department of Lands and Survey. The property is protected by the Antiquities Law 21/1988 and subsequent amendments, which also provide for the existence of a buffer zone with legal restrictions on construction or modification of buildings. Zoning regulations further control urban development in the buffer zone.
The Department of Antiquities of Jordan is responsible for the protection and management of the property. At the site level, Umm Al-Jimāl is under the purview of the Department’s Mafraq Antiquities Directorate and its Umm Al-Jimāl Site Management Unit. The Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities through its Mafraq office assumes control of tourism development, activities and facilities. Umm Al-Jimāl New Municipality collaborates in protecting the site and enforcing buffer zone restrictions.
The Umm Al-Jimāl Site Management Plan, which presents a five‑year vision for the future management of the site and formalisation of processes geared towards protection of the property, is yet to be approved.