country : Denmark

Brief synthesis
Kronborg Castle is located north of Elsinore on a strategically important site commanding the Sound (Øresund), a narrow stretch of water between Denmark and Sweden. From the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries, Kronborg Castle played a key role in the history of Northern Europe.
The Sound is the gateway to the Baltic Sea and from 1429 to 1857, Denmark controlled this passage thanks to Kronborg Castle, positioned at the narrowest part of the Sound, which is only four kilometres wide. Around 1.8 million ships passed through the Sound during this period and all of them had to pay a toll at Kronborg Castle. For this reason Kronborg Castle and its fortress became a symbol of Denmark’s power. The Sound toll was not just a source of income; it was also a political instrument. By favouring the shipping trade of selected nations or by allowing their navies free passage, Denmark was in a position to create important alliances. The control of the Sound was essential and it became an important issue in the motives and courses of several wars. For this reason Kronborg Castle was of great significance, not just for Denmark, but for all major seafaring nations.
In the 1420s, Eric of Pomerania built the first castle, the ”Krogen”, on this unique site. Remnants of the old walls can still be seen at the castle today. In 1574 King Frederik II began the construction of the outstanding Renaissance castle and the surrounding fortifications, which would eventually be known as Kronborg Castle. Following the disastrous fire of 1629 the castle was reconstructed almost exactly as it was before. The Chapel, which was the only building not to have been ravaged by the fire, has preserved its original altar, gallery, and pews, with fine carvings and painted panels.
The castle itself is a Renaissance building with four wings surrounding a spacious courtyard. The bright sandstone facades are characterized by horizontal bands and the front walls are balanced by towers and spires. The castle is extensively and richly decorated with sandstone ornaments in unique and imaginative designs. The Great Hall (the banqueting hall) is one of the most exquisite rooms from this time – and the largest of its kind in Northern Europe. Kronborg Castle is also world famous as the setting of Shakespeare’s
Hamlet
.
Kronborg Castle was admired for its beauty as a castle and feared for its strength as a fortress. The castle was protected by tall ramparts and strong angular bastions. The overall impression of Kronborg Castle is closely associated with its architecture and location, which stress the castle's symbolic, commercial, and strategic importance.
Criterion (iv):
Kronborg Castle is an outstanding example of the Renaissance castle, and one which played a highly significant role in the history of this region of northern Europe.
Integrity
All the elements required to express Kronborg’s value as a Renaissance castle and military fortress are found within the borders of the inscribed area. For the purposes of effective protection of the important views, a permanent buffer zone has been established and view corridors have been designated. At the time of inscription, a temporary buffer zone of 100 meters had been established around Kronborg Castle. Furthermore, it was required that the passage between Kronborg Castle and the medieval city of Elsinore be opened up. The buffer zone should be defined once an overall plan is decided for this area, including the removal of parts of the former shipyard.
Authenticity
Over the centuries, Kronborg Castle has undergone several alterations. In 1629 the castle was destroyed by a fire, but it was rebuilt shortly after in almost precisely the same shape. In 1658 the fortress was bombarded and conquered by the Swedish army, which subsequently plundered the castle. In 1785, when the military moved into the castle, several alterations were made to the interior space. In 1924-38, when the military no longer occupied the fortress, a thorough restoration took place and the alterations were removed. In 1991 the military finally abandoned the Kronborg area. Throughout the years, the fortifications surrounding the castle have been altered and expanded to accommodate new arms and their ranges. In 1882, when the Elsinore shipyard was founded, the fortress area was partially destroyed. After the closure and demolition of parts of the shipyard in 1982, restoration projects were carried out in order to restore and re-establish the fortified area’s previous size and shape for the purpose of enhancing the experience of the castle’s strategic value.
The exterior of Kronborg Castle has always been well maintained and considerable efforts have been made to ensure its authenticity in terms of design, choice of construction material, and craftsmanship. Continual restoration of the castle’s facades is carried out, including the carving of replicas of the unique sandstone ornaments. All the work on the castle is undertaken with respect for the original choices of building materials and designs.
Protection and management requirements
Kronborg Castle and the surrounding fortifications belong to the Danish State. The castle and the adjoining fortress are listed buildings and protected in accordance with the Preservation of Buildings Act and the Museum Act. This means that all changes must be approved by the Danish Agency for Culture. The castle and its fortress are managed by the Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties in the Ministry of Culture.
With a view to strengthening the protection of Kronborg Castle, Elsinore City Council and the Danish Agency for Culture joined forces and drew up a final agreement on the buffer zone and the establishment of view corridors. The agreement was implemented in an addendum to the municipal plan, which was approved April 2011. The town plan of the Elsinore Municipality outlines the main features of the city’s development and the framework for the district plan.
The management plan for Kronborg Castle has been prepared and addresses the long term threats against Kronborg. These are mainly building and ground decay, as a result of lack of maintenance, climate or due to fire. These threats are identified and prevented through inspection, maintenance and monitoring, which are carried out by the Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties. Although Kronborg is a robust fortress, more visitors may cause an increase in the wear and vandalism. This potential threat is addressed through information and guidance for the visitors, electronic and physical surveillance and an increased focus on maintenance. The management plan is regularly reviewed